.. currentmodule:: cf
.. default-role:: obj

.. _Tutorial:

**Tutorial**
============

----

Version |release| for version |version| of the CF conventions.

All of the Python code in this tutorial is available in an executable
script (:download:`download <../source/tutorial.py>`, 36kB).

.. https://stackoverflow.com/questions/24129481/how-to-include-a-local-table-of-contents-into-sphinx-doc

.. http://docutils.sourceforge.net/docs/ref/rst/directives.html#table-of-contents

.. http://docutils.sourceforge.net/docs/ref/rst/directives.html#list-table
  
.. important:: **This version of cf is for Python 3 only** and there are
          :ref:`incompatible differences between versions 2.x and 3.x
          <two-to-three-changes>` of cf.

	  Scripts written for version 2.x but running under version
          3.x should either work as expected, or provide informative
          error messages on the new API usage. However, it is advised
          that the outputs of older scripts are checked when running
          with Python 3 versions of the cf library.

	  For version 2.x documentation, see the :ref:`releases
	  <Releases>` page.

.. contents::
   :local:
   :backlinks: entry

.. include:: sample_datasets.rst

.. _Import:

**Import**
----------

The cf package is imported as follows:

.. code-block:: python
   :caption: *Import the cf package.*

   >>> import cf

.. tip:: It is possible to change the extent to which cf outputs
         feedback messages and it may be instructive to increase the
         verbosity whilst working through this tutorial to see and
         learn more about what cf is doing under the hood and about
         the nature of the dataset being operated on. This can be done
         for example by running:

         .. code-block:: python
            :caption: *Increase the verbosity of cf from the default.*

            >>> cf.log_level('INFO')

         See :ref:`the section on 'Logging' <Logging>` for
         more information.

.. _CF-version:

CF version
^^^^^^^^^^

The version of the `CF conventions <http://cfconventions.org>`_ and
the :ref:`CF data model <CF-data-model>` being used may be found with
the `cf.CF` function:

.. code-block:: python
   :caption: *Retrieve the version of the CF conventions.*
      
   >>> cf.CF()
   '1.8'

This indicates which version of the CF conventions are represented by
this release of the cf package, and therefore the version can not be
changed.

Note, however, that datasets of different CF versions may be
:ref:`read <Reading-datasets>` from, or :ref:`written
<Writing-to-a-netCDF-dataset>` to netCDF.

----

**Field construct**
-------------------

The central construct (i.e. element) to CF is the :term:`field
construct`. The field construct, that corresponds to a CF-netCDF data
variable, includes all of the metadata to describe it:

    * descriptive properties that apply to field construct as a whole
      (e.g. the standard name),
    * a data array, and
    * "metadata constructs" that describe the locations of each cell
      of the data array, and the physical nature of each cell's datum.

A field construct is stored in a `cf.Field` instance, and henceforth
the phrase "field construct" will be assumed to mean "`cf.Field`
instance".

----

.. _Reading-datasets:

**Reading field constructs from datasets**
------------------------------------------

The `cf.read` function reads files from disk, or from an `OPeNDAP
<https://www.opendap.org/>`_ URLs [#dap]_, and returns the contents in
a `cf.FieldList` instance that contains zero or more field constructs.

A :ref:`field list <Field-lists>` is very much like a Python `list`,
with the addition of extra methods that operate on its field construct
elements.

The following file types can be read:

* All formats of netCDF3 and netCDF4 files (including `CFA-netCDF
  <http://www.met.reading.ac.uk/~david/cfa/0.4/index.html>`_ files)
  can be read, containing datasets for any version of CF up to and
  including CF-|version|.

..

* Files in `CDL format
  <https://www.unidata.ucar.edu/software/netcdf/docs/netcdf_utilities_guide.html>`_,
  with or without the data array values.

..

* :ref:`PP and UM fields files <PP-and-UM-fields-files>`, whose
  contents are mapped into field constructs.

Note that when reading netCDF4 files that contain :ref:`hierachical
groups <Hierarchical-groups>`, the group structure is saved via the
:ref:`netCDF interface <NetCDF-interface>` so that it may be re-used,
or modified, if the field constructs are written to back to disk.
       
For example, to read the file ``file.nc`` (found in the :ref:`sample
datasets <Sample-datasets>`), which contains
two field constructs:

.. code-block:: python
   :caption: *Read file.nc and show that the result is a two-element
             field list.*
		
   >>> x = cf.read('file.nc')
   >>> type(x)
   <class 'cf.fieldlist.FieldList'>
   >>> len(x)
   2

Descriptive properties are always read into memory, but `lazy loading
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lazy_loading>`_ is employed for all
data arrays, which means that no data is read into memory until the
data is required for inspection or to modify the array contents. This
maximises the number of field constructs that may be read within a
session, and makes the read operation fast.

Multiple files may be read in one command using `UNIX wild card
characters
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Glob_(programming)#Syntax>`_, or a
sequence of file names (each element of which may also contain wild
cards). Shell environment variables are also permitted.

.. code-block:: python
   :caption: *Read the ten sample netCDF files, noting that they
             contain more than ten field constructs.*
		
   >>> y = cf.read('*.nc')
   >>> len(y)
   14

.. code-block:: python
   :caption: *Read two particular files, noting that they contain more
             than two field constructs.*
		
   >>> z = cf.read(['file.nc', 'precipitation_flux.nc'])
   >>> len(z)
   3

All of the datasets in one more directories may also be read by
replacing any file name with a directory name. An attempt will be made
to read all files in the directory, which will result in an error if
any have a non-supported format. Non-supported files may be ignored
with the *ignore_read_error* keyword.

.. code-block:: python
   :caption: *Read all of the files in the current working directory.*

   >>> y = cf.read('$PWD')  # Raises Exception
   Traceback (most recent call last):
       ...
   Exception: Can't determine format of file cf_tutorial_files.zip
   >>> y = cf.read('$PWD', ignore_read_error=True)
   >>> len(y)
   15

In all cases, the default behaviour is to aggregate the contents of
all input datasets into as few field constructs as possible, and it is
these aggregated field constructs are returned by `cf.read`. See the
section on :ref:`aggregation <Aggregation>` for full details.

The `cf.read` function has optional parameters to

* allow the user to provide files that contain :ref:`external
  variables <External-variables>`;

* request :ref:`extra field constructs to be created from "metadata"
  netCDF variables <Creation-by-reading>`, i.e. those that are
  referenced from CF-netCDF data variables, but which are not regarded
  by default as data variables in their own right;

* request that masking is *not* applied by convention to data elements
  (see :ref:`data masking <Data-mask>`); 

* issue warnings when ``valid_min``, ``valid_max`` and ``valid_range``
  attributes are present (see :ref:`data masking <Data-mask>`);

* display information and issue warnings about the mapping of the
  netCDF file contents to CF data model constructs;

* remove from, or include, size one dimensions on the field
  constructs' data;

* configure the :ref:`field construct aggregation process <Aggregation>`;
  
* configure the reading of directories to allow sub-directories to be
  read recursively, and to allow directories which resolve to symbolic
  links; and
  
* configure parameters for :ref:`reading PP and UM fields files
  <PP-and-UM-fields-files>`.
  
.. _CF-compliance:

CF-compliance
^^^^^^^^^^^^^
  
If the dataset is partially CF-compliant to the extent that it is not
possible to unambiguously map an element of the netCDF dataset to an
element of the CF data model, then a field construct is still
returned, but may be incomplete. This is so that datasets which are
partially conformant may nonetheless be modified in memory and written
to new datasets. Such "structural" non-compliance would occur, for
example, if the ``coordinates`` attribute of a CF-netCDF data variable
refers to another variable that does not exist, or refers to a
variable that spans a netCDF dimension that does not apply to the data
variable. Other types of non-compliance are not checked, such whether
or not controlled vocabularies have been adhered to. The structural
compliance of the dataset may be checked with the
`~cf.Field.dataset_compliance` method of the field construct, as well
as optionally displayed when the dataset is read.

----

.. _Inspection:

**Inspection**
--------------

The contents of a field construct may be inspected at three different
levels of detail.

.. _Minimal-detail:

Minimal detail
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The built-in `repr` function, invoked on a variable by calling that variable
alone at the interpreter prompt, returns a short, one-line description:

.. code-block:: python
   :caption: *Inspect the contents of the two field constructs from
             the dataset and create a Python variable for each of
             them.*

   >>> x = cf.read('file.nc')
   >>> x
   [<CF Field: specific_humidity(latitude(5), longitude(8)) 1>,
    <CF Field: air_temperature(atmosphere_hybrid_height_coordinate(1), grid_latitude(10), grid_longitude(9)) K>]
   >>> q = x[0]
   >>> t = x[1]
   >>> q
   <CF Field: specific_humidity(latitude(5), longitude(8)) 1>
   
This gives the identity of the field construct
(e.g. "specific_humidity"), the identities and sizes of the dimensions
spanned by the data array ("latitude" and "longitude" with sizes 5 and
8 respectively) and the units of the data ("1", i.e. dimensionless).

.. _Medium-detail:

Medium detail
^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The built-in `str` function, invoked by a `print` call on a field construct,
returns similar information as the one-line output, along with short
descriptions of the metadata constructs, which include the first and last
values of their data arrays:

.. code-block:: python
   :caption: *Inspect the contents of the two field constructs with
             medium detail.*
   
   >>> print(q)
   Field: specific_humidity (ncvar%q)
   ----------------------------------
   Data            : specific_humidity(latitude(5), longitude(8)) 1
   Cell methods    : area: mean
   Dimension coords: latitude(5) = [-75.0, ..., 75.0] degrees_north
                   : longitude(8) = [22.5, ..., 337.5] degrees_east
                   : time(1) = [2019-01-01 00:00:00]
   >>> print(t)
   Field: air_temperature (ncvar%ta)
   ---------------------------------
   Data            : air_temperature(atmosphere_hybrid_height_coordinate(1), grid_latitude(10), grid_longitude(9)) K
   Cell methods    : grid_latitude(10): grid_longitude(9): mean where land (interval: 0.1 degrees) time(1): maximum
   Field ancils    : air_temperature standard_error(grid_latitude(10), grid_longitude(9)) = [[0.76, ..., 0.32]] K
   Dimension coords: atmosphere_hybrid_height_coordinate(1) = [1.5]
                   : grid_latitude(10) = [2.2, ..., -1.76] degrees
                   : grid_longitude(9) = [-4.7, ..., -1.18] degrees
                   : time(1) = [2019-01-01 00:00:00]
   Auxiliary coords: latitude(grid_latitude(10), grid_longitude(9)) = [[53.941, ..., 50.225]] degrees_N
                   : longitude(grid_longitude(9), grid_latitude(10)) = [[2.004, ..., 8.156]] degrees_E
                   : long_name=Grid latitude name(grid_latitude(10)) = [--, ..., b'kappa']
   Cell measures   : measure:area(grid_longitude(9), grid_latitude(10)) = [[2391.9657, ..., 2392.6009]] km2
   Coord references: grid_mapping_name:rotated_latitude_longitude
                   : standard_name:atmosphere_hybrid_height_coordinate
   Domain ancils   : ncvar%a(atmosphere_hybrid_height_coordinate(1)) = [10.0] m
                   : ncvar%b(atmosphere_hybrid_height_coordinate(1)) = [20.0]
                   : surface_altitude(grid_latitude(10), grid_longitude(9)) = [[0.0, ..., 270.0]] m

Note that :ref:`time values <Time>` are converted to date-times with
the `cftime package <https://unidata.github.io/cftime/>`_.
		   
.. _Full-detail:

Full detail
^^^^^^^^^^^

The `~cf.Field.dump` method of the field construct gives all
properties of all constructs, including metadata constructs and their
components, and shows the first and last values of all data arrays:

.. code-block:: python
   :caption: *Inspect the contents of the two field constructs with
             full detail.*

   >>> q.dump()
   ----------------------------------
   Field: specific_humidity (ncvar%q)
   ----------------------------------
   Conventions = 'CF-1.7'
   project = 'research'
   standard_name = 'specific_humidity'
   units = '1'
   
   Data(latitude(5), longitude(8)) = [[0.003, ..., 0.032]] 1
   
   Cell Method: area: mean
   
   Domain Axis: latitude(5)
   Domain Axis: longitude(8)
   Domain Axis: time(1)
   
   Dimension coordinate: latitude
       standard_name = 'latitude'
       units = 'degrees_north'
       Data(latitude(5)) = [-75.0, ..., 75.0] degrees_north
       Bounds:Data(latitude(5), 2) = [[-90.0, ..., 90.0]]
   
   Dimension coordinate: longitude
       standard_name = 'longitude'
       units = 'degrees_east'
       Data(longitude(8)) = [22.5, ..., 337.5] degrees_east
       Bounds:Data(longitude(8), 2) = [[0.0, ..., 360.0]]
   
   Dimension coordinate: time
       standard_name = 'time'
       units = 'days since 2018-12-01'
       Data(time(1)) = [2019-01-01 00:00:00]
  
   >>> t.dump()
   ---------------------------------
   Field: air_temperature (ncvar%ta)
   ---------------------------------
   Conventions = 'CF-1.7'
   project = 'research'
   standard_name = 'air_temperature'
   units = 'K'
   
   Data(atmosphere_hybrid_height_coordinate(1), grid_latitude(10), grid_longitude(9)) = [[[0.0, ..., 89.0]]] K
   
   Cell Method: grid_latitude(10): grid_longitude(9): mean where land (interval: 0.1 degrees)
   Cell Method: time(1): maximum
   
   Field Ancillary: air_temperature standard_error
       standard_name = 'air_temperature standard_error'
       units = 'K'
       Data(grid_latitude(10), grid_longitude(9)) = [[0.76, ..., 0.32]] K
   
   Domain Axis: atmosphere_hybrid_height_coordinate(1)
   Domain Axis: grid_latitude(10)
   Domain Axis: grid_longitude(9)
   Domain Axis: time(1)
   
   Dimension coordinate: atmosphere_hybrid_height_coordinate
       computed_standard_name = 'altitude'
       standard_name = 'atmosphere_hybrid_height_coordinate'
       Data(atmosphere_hybrid_height_coordinate(1)) = [1.5]
       Bounds:Data(atmosphere_hybrid_height_coordinate(1), 2) = [[1.0, 2.0]]
   
   Dimension coordinate: grid_latitude
       standard_name = 'grid_latitude'
       units = 'degrees'
       Data(grid_latitude(10)) = [2.2, ..., -1.76] degrees
       Bounds:Data(grid_latitude(10), 2) = [[2.42, ..., -1.98]]
   
   Dimension coordinate: grid_longitude
       standard_name = 'grid_longitude'
       units = 'degrees'
       Data(grid_longitude(9)) = [-4.7, ..., -1.18] degrees
       Bounds:Data(grid_longitude(9), 2) = [[-4.92, ..., -0.96]]
   
   Dimension coordinate: time
       standard_name = 'time'
       units = 'days since 2018-12-01'
       Data(time(1)) = [2019-01-01 00:00:00]
   
   Auxiliary coordinate: latitude
       standard_name = 'latitude'
       units = 'degrees_N'
       Data(grid_latitude(10), grid_longitude(9)) = [[53.941, ..., 50.225]] degrees_N
   
   Auxiliary coordinate: longitude
       standard_name = 'longitude'
       units = 'degrees_E'
       Data(grid_longitude(9), grid_latitude(10)) = [[2.004, ..., 8.156]] degrees_E
   
   Auxiliary coordinate: long_name=Grid latitude name
       long_name = 'Grid latitude name'
       Data(grid_latitude(10)) = [--, ..., 'kappa']
   
   Domain ancillary: ncvar%a
       units = 'm'
       Data(atmosphere_hybrid_height_coordinate(1)) = [10.0] m
       Bounds:Data(atmosphere_hybrid_height_coordinate(1), 2) = [[5.0, 15.0]]
   
   Domain ancillary: ncvar%b
       Data(atmosphere_hybrid_height_coordinate(1)) = [20.0]
       Bounds:Data(atmosphere_hybrid_height_coordinate(1), 2) = [[14.0, 26.0]]
   
   Domain ancillary: surface_altitude
       standard_name = 'surface_altitude'
       units = 'm'
       Data(grid_latitude(10), grid_longitude(9)) = [[0.0, ..., 270.0]] m
   
   Coordinate reference: atmosphere_hybrid_height_coordinate
       Coordinate conversion:computed_standard_name = altitude
       Coordinate conversion:standard_name = atmosphere_hybrid_height_coordinate
       Coordinate conversion:a = Domain Ancillary: ncvar%a
       Coordinate conversion:b = Domain Ancillary: ncvar%b
       Coordinate conversion:orog = Domain Ancillary: surface_altitude
       Datum:earth_radius = 6371007
       Dimension Coordinate: atmosphere_hybrid_height_coordinate
   
   Coordinate reference: rotated_latitude_longitude
       Coordinate conversion:grid_mapping_name = rotated_latitude_longitude
       Coordinate conversion:grid_north_pole_latitude = 38.0
       Coordinate conversion:grid_north_pole_longitude = 190.0
       Datum:earth_radius = 6371007
       Dimension Coordinate: grid_longitude
       Dimension Coordinate: grid_latitude
       Auxiliary Coordinate: longitude
       Auxiliary Coordinate: latitude
   
   Cell measure: measure:area
       units = 'km2'
       Data(grid_longitude(9), grid_latitude(10)) = [[2391.9657, ..., 2392.6009]] km2

.. _File-inspection-with-cfa:
       
File inspection with cfa
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The description for every field constructs found in datasets also be
generated from the command line, with minimal, medium or full detail,
by using the ``cfa`` tool, for example:

.. code-block:: console
   :caption: *Use cfa on the command line to inspect the field
             constructs contained in one or more datasets. The "-1"
             option treats all input files collectively as a single CF
             dataset, so that aggregation is attempted within and
             between the input files.*

   $ cfa file.nc
   CF Field: air_temperature(atmosphere_hybrid_height_coordinate(1), grid_latitude(10), grid_longitude(9)) K
   CF Field: specific_humidity(latitude(5), longitude(8)) 1
   $ cfa -1 *.nc
   CF Field: specific_humidity(cf_role=timeseries_id(4), ncdim%timeseries(9))
   CF Field: cell_area(ncdim%longitude(9), ncdim%latitude(10)) m2
   CF Field: eastward_wind(latitude(10), longitude(9)) m s-1
   CF Field: specific_humidity(latitude(5), longitude(8)) 1
   CF Field: air_potential_temperature(time(120), latitude(5), longitude(8)) K
   CF Field: precipitation_flux(time(1), latitude(64), longitude(128)) kg m-2 day-1
   CF Field: precipitation_flux(time(2), latitude(4), longitude(5)) kg m2 s-1
   CF Field: air_temperature(time(2), latitude(73), longitude(96)) K
   CF Field: air_temperature(atmosphere_hybrid_height_coordinate(1), grid_latitude(10), grid_longitude(9)) K

``cfa`` may also be used to :ref:`write aggregated field constructs to
new datasets <Creation-with-cfa>`, and may be used with :ref:`external
files <External-variables-with-cfa>`.

----

**Visualization**
-----------------

Powerful, flexible, and very simple to produce visualizations of field
constructs are available with the `cfplot` package (that needs to be
installed separately to cf, see http://ajheaps.github.io/cf-plot for
details).

.. figure:: images/cfplot_example.png

   *Example output of cfplot displaying a cf field construct.*

See the `cfplot gallery
<http://ajheaps.github.io/cf-plot/gallery.html>`_ for the wide range
of plotting possibilities, with example code. These include, but are
not limited to:

* Cylindrical, polar stereographic and other plane projections
* Latitude or longitude vs. height or pressure
* Hovmuller
* Vectors
* Stipples
* Multiple plots on a page
* Colour scales
* User defined axes
* Rotated pole
* Irregular grids
* Trajectories
* Line plots  

----

.. _Field-lists:

**Field lists**
---------------

A field list, contained in a `cf.FieldList` instance, is an ordered
sequence of field constructs. It supports all of the Python `list`
operations, such as indexing, iteration, and methods like
`~FieldList.append`.

.. code-block:: python
   :caption: *List-like operations on field list instances.*

   >>> x = cf.read('file.nc')
   >>> y = cf.read('precipitation_flux.nc')
   >>> x
   [<CF Field: specific_humidity(latitude(5), longitude(8)) 1>,
    <CF Field: air_temperature(atmosphere_hybrid_height_coordinate(1), grid_latitude(10), grid_longitude(9)) K>]
   >>> y                                       
   [<CF Field: precipitation_flux(time(1), latitude(64), longitude(128)) kg m-2 day-1>]
   >>> y.extend(x)                                       
   >>> y
   [<CF Field: precipitation_flux(time(1), latitude(64), longitude(128)) kg m-2 day-1>,
    <CF Field: specific_humidity(latitude(5), longitude(8)) 1>,
    <CF Field: air_temperature(atmosphere_hybrid_height_coordinate(1), grid_latitude(10), grid_longitude(9)) K>]
   >>> y[2]
   <CF Field: air_temperature(atmosphere_hybrid_height_coordinate(1), grid_latitude(10), grid_longitude(9)) K>
   >>> y[::-1]
   [<CF Field: air_temperature(atmosphere_hybrid_height_coordinate(1), grid_latitude(10), grid_longitude(9)) K>,
    <CF Field: specific_humidity(latitude(5), longitude(8)) 1>,
    <CF Field: precipitation_flux(time(1), latitude(64), longitude(128)) kg m-2 day-1>]
   >>> len(y)
   3
   >>> len(y + y)
   6
   >>> len(y * 4)
   12
   >>> for f in y:
   ...     print('field:', repr(f))
   ...
   field: <CF Field: precipitation_flux(time(1), latitude(64), longitude(128)) kg m-2 day-1>
   field: <CF Field: specific_humidity(latitude(5), longitude(8)) 1>
   field: <CF Field: air_temperature(atmosphere_hybrid_height_coordinate(1), grid_latitude(10), grid_longitude(9)) K>


The field list also has some additional methods for :ref:`copying
<Field-list-copying>`, :ref:`testing equality <Field-list-equality>`,
:ref:`sorting and selection <Sorting-and-selecting-from-field-lists>`.

----
     
.. _Properties:

**Properties**
--------------

Descriptive properties that apply to field construct as a whole may be
retrieved with the `~Field.properties` method:

.. code-block:: python
   :caption: *Retrieve all of the descriptive properties*

   >>> q, t = cf.read('file.nc')
   >>> t.properties()
   {'Conventions': 'CF-1.7',
    'project': 'research',
    'standard_name': 'air_temperature',
    'units': 'K'}
   
.. note::

   From a Python script or using the standard Python shell, the result of
   methods such as the property methods given here will be returned in
   condensed form, without linebreaks between items.

   If a "pretty printed" output as displayed in these pages is preferred,
   use the
   `ipython shell <https://ipython.readthedocs.io/en/stable/index.html>`_ or
   wrap calls with a suitable method from Python's dedicated
   `pprint module <https://docs.python.org/3/library/pprint.html>`_.

Individual properties may be accessed and modified with the
`~Field.del_property`, `~Field.get_property`, `~Field.has_property`,
and `~Field.set_property` methods:

.. code-block:: python
   :caption: *Check is a property exists, retrieve its value, delete
             it and then set it to a new value.*
      
   >>> t.has_property('standard_name')
   True
   >>> t.get_property('standard_name')
   'air_temperature'
   >>> t.del_property('standard_name')
   'air_temperature'
   >>> t.get_property('standard_name', default='not set')
   'not set'
   >>> t.set_property('standard_name', value='air_temperature')
   >>> t.get_property('standard_name', default='not set')
   'air_temperature'

A collection of properties may be set at the same time with the
`~Field.set_properties` method of the field construct, and all
properties may be completely removed with the
`~Field.clear_properties` method.

.. code-block:: python
   :caption: *Update the properties with a collection, delete all of
             the properties, and reinstate the original properties.*
	     
   >>> original = t.properties()
   >>> original
   {'Conventions': 'CF-1.7',
    'project': 'research',
    'standard_name': 'air_temperature',
    'units': 'K'}
   >>> t.set_properties({'foo': 'bar', 'units': 'K'})
   >>> t.properties()
   {'Conventions': 'CF-1.7',
    'foo': 'bar',
    'project': 'research',
    'standard_name': 'air_temperature',
    'units': 'K'}
   >>> t.clear_properties()
    {'Conventions': 'CF-1.7',
    'foo': 'bar',
    'project': 'research',
    'standard_name': 'air_temperature',
    'units': 'K'}
   >>> t.properties()
   {'units': 'K'}
   >>> t.set_properties(original)
   >>> t.properties()
   {'Conventions': 'CF-1.7',
    'project': 'research',
    'standard_name': 'air_temperature',
    'units': 'K'}

Note that the ``units`` property persisted after the call to the
`~Field.clear_properties` method because is it deeply associated with
the field construct's data, which still exists.
    
All of the methods related to the properties are listed :ref:`here
<Field-Properties>`.

.. _Field-identities:
    
Field identities
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

A field construct identity is a string that describes the construct
and is based on the field construct's properties. A canonical identity
is returned by the `~Field.identity` method of the field construct,
and all possible identities are returned by the `~Field.identities`
method.

A field construct's identity may be any one of the following

* The value of the `~Field.standard_name` property,
  e.g. ``'air_temperature'``,
* The value of the `~Field.id` attribute, preceded by ``'id%='``,
* The value of any property, preceded by the property name and an
  equals, e.g. ``'long_name=Air Temperature'``, ``'foo=bar'``, etc.,
* The netCDF variable name, preceded by "ncvar%", e.g. ``'ncvar%tas'``
  (see the :ref:`netCDF interface <NetCDF-interface>`),

.. code-block:: python
   :caption: *Get the canonical identity, and all identities, of a
             field construct.*

   >>> t.identity()
   'air_temperature'
   >>> t.identities()
   ['air_temperature',
    'Conventions=CF-1.7',
    'project=research',
    'units=K',
    'standard_name=air_temperature',
    'ncvar%ta']

The identity returned by the `~Field.identity` method is, by default,
the least ambiguous identity (defined in the method documentation),
but it may be restricted to the `~Field.standard_name` property and
`~Field.id` attribute; or also the `~Field.long_name` property and
netCDF variable name (see the :ref:`netCDF interface
<NetCDF-interface>`). See the *strict* and *relaxed* keywords.
        
----

.. _Metadata-constructs:

**Metadata constructs**
-----------------------

The metadata constructs describe the field construct that contains
them. Each :ref:`CF data model metadata construct <CF-data-model>` has
a corresponding cf class:

.. list-table:: 
   :header-rows: 1
   :align: left
   :widths: auto
	    
   * - Class
     - CF data model construct
     - Description                     
   * - `cf.DomainAxis`
     - Domain axis
     - Independent axes of the domain
   * - `cf.DimensionCoordinate`
     - Dimension coordinate
     - Domain cell locations         
   * - `cf.AuxiliaryCoordinate`
     - Auxiliary coordinate
     - Domain cell locations         
   * - `cf.CoordinateReference`
     - Coordinate reference
     - Domain coordinate systems     
   * - `cf.DomainAncillary`
     - Domain ancillary
     - Cell locations in alternative coordinate systems
   * - `cf.CellMeasure`
     - Cell measure
     - Domain cell size or shape     
   * - `cf.FieldAncillary`
     - Field ancillary
     - Ancillary metadata which vary within the domain	       
   * - `cf.CellMethod`
     - Cell method
     - Describes how data represent variation within cells	       

Metadata constructs of a particular type can be retrieved with the
following attributes of the field construct:

==============================  =====================  
Attribute                       Metadata constructs    
==============================  =====================  
`~Field.domain_axes`            Domain axes            
`~Field.dimension_coordinates`  Dimension coordinates  
`~Field.auxiliary_coordinates`  Auxiliary coordinates  
`~Field.coordinate_references`  Coordinate references  
`~Field.domain_ancillaries`     Domain ancillaries     
`~Field.cell_measures`          Cell measures          
`~Field.field_ancillaries`      Field ancillaries      
`~Field.cell_methods`           Cell methods                               
==============================  =====================  

Each of these attributes returns a `cf.Constructs` class instance that
maps metadata constructs to unique identifiers called "construct
keys". A `cf.Constructs` instance has methods for selecting constructs
that meet particular criteria (see
:ref:`Filtering-metadata-constructs`). It also behaves like a
"read-only" Python dictionary, in that it has `~Constructs.items`,
`~Constructs.keys` and `~Constructs.values` methods that work exactly
like their corresponding `dict` methods. It also has a
`~Constructs.get` method and indexing like a Python dictionary (see
:ref:`Metadata-construct-access` for details).

.. Each of these methods returns a dictionary whose values are the
   metadata constructs of one type, keyed by a unique identifier
   called a "construct key":

.. code-block:: python
   :caption: *Retrieve the field construct's coordinate reference
             constructs, and access them using dictionary methods.*
      
   >>> q, t = cf.read('file.nc')
   >>> t.coordinate_references
   <CF Constructs: coordinate_reference(2)>
   >>> print(t.coordinate_references)
   Constructs:
   {'coordinatereference0': <CF CoordinateReference: standard_name:atmosphere_hybrid_height_coordinate>,
    'coordinatereference1': <CF CoordinateReference: grid_mapping_name:rotated_latitude_longitude>}
   >>> list(t.coordinate_references.keys())
   ['coordinatereference0', 'coordinatereference1']
   >>> for key, value in t.coordinate_references.items():
   ...     print(key, repr(value))
   ...
   coordinatereference0 <CF CoordinateReference: standard_name:atmosphere_hybrid_height_coordinate>
   coordinatereference1 <CF CoordinateReference: grid_mapping_name:rotated_latitude_longitude>

.. code-block:: python
   :caption: *Retrieve the field construct's dimension coordinate and
             domain axis constructs.*
      
   >>> print(t.dimension_coordinates)
   Constructs:
   {'dimensioncoordinate0': <CF DimensionCoordinate: atmosphere_hybrid_height_coordinate(1) >,
    'dimensioncoordinate1': <CF DimensionCoordinate: grid_latitude(10) degrees>,
    'dimensioncoordinate2': <CF DimensionCoordinate: grid_longitude(9) degrees>,
    'dimensioncoordinate3': <CF DimensionCoordinate: time(1) days since 2018-12-01 >}
   >>> print(t.domain_axes)
   Constructs:
   {'domainaxis0': <CF DomainAxis: size(1)>,
    'domainaxis1': <CF DomainAxis: size(10)>,
    'domainaxis2': <CF DomainAxis: size(9)>,
    'domainaxis3': <CF DomainAxis: size(1)>}

The construct keys (e.g. ``'domainaxis1'``) are usually generated
internally and are unique within the field construct. However,
construct keys may be different for equivalent metadata constructs
from different field constructs, and for different Python sessions.

Metadata constructs of all types may be returned by the
`~Field.constructs` attribute of the field construct:

.. code-block:: python
   :caption: *Retrieve all of the field construct's metadata
             constructs.*

   >>> q.constructs
   <CF Constructs: cell_method(1), dimension_coordinate(3), domain_axis(3)>
   >>> print(q.constructs)
   Constructs:
   {'cellmethod0': <CF CellMethod: area: mean>,
    'dimensioncoordinate0': <CF DimensionCoordinate: latitude(5) degrees_north>,
    'dimensioncoordinate1': <CF DimensionCoordinate: longitude(8) degrees_east>,
    'dimensioncoordinate2': <CF DimensionCoordinate: time(1) days since 2018-12-01 >,
    'domainaxis0': <CF DomainAxis: size(5)>,
    'domainaxis1': <CF DomainAxis: size(8)>,
    'domainaxis2': <CF DomainAxis: size(1)>}
   >>> t.constructs
   <CF Constructs: auxiliary_coordinate(3), cell_measure(1), cell_method(2), coordinate_reference(2), dimension_coordinate(4), domain_ancillary(3), domain_axis(4), field_ancillary(1)>
   >>> print(t.constructs)
   Constructs:
   {'auxiliarycoordinate0': <CF AuxiliaryCoordinate: latitude(10, 9) degrees_N>,
    'auxiliarycoordinate1': <CF AuxiliaryCoordinate: longitude(9, 10) degrees_E>,
    'auxiliarycoordinate2': <CF AuxiliaryCoordinate: long_name=Grid latitude name(10) >,
    'cellmeasure0': <CF CellMeasure: measure:area(9, 10) km2>,
    'cellmethod0': <CF CellMethod: domainaxis1: domainaxis2: mean where land (interval: 0.1 degrees)>,
    'cellmethod1': <CF CellMethod: domainaxis3: maximum>,
    'coordinatereference0': <CF CoordinateReference: standard_name:atmosphere_hybrid_height_coordinate>,
    'coordinatereference1': <CF CoordinateReference: grid_mapping_name:rotated_latitude_longitude>,
    'dimensioncoordinate0': <CF DimensionCoordinate: atmosphere_hybrid_height_coordinate(1) >,
    'dimensioncoordinate1': <CF DimensionCoordinate: grid_latitude(10) degrees>,
    'dimensioncoordinate2': <CF DimensionCoordinate: grid_longitude(9) degrees>,
    'dimensioncoordinate3': <CF DimensionCoordinate: time(1) days since 2018-12-01 >,
    'domainancillary0': <CF DomainAncillary: ncvar%a(1) m>,
    'domainancillary1': <CF DomainAncillary: ncvar%b(1) >,
    'domainancillary2': <CF DomainAncillary: surface_altitude(10, 9) m>,
    'domainaxis0': <CF DomainAxis: size(1)>,
    'domainaxis1': <CF DomainAxis: size(10)>,
    'domainaxis2': <CF DomainAxis: size(9)>,
    'domainaxis3': <CF DomainAxis: size(1)>,
    'fieldancillary0': <CF FieldAncillary: air_temperature standard_error(10, 9) K>}

----

.. _Data:

**Data**
--------

The field construct's data is stored in a `cf.Data` class instance that
is accessed with the `~Field.data` attribute of the field construct.

.. code-block:: python
   :caption: *Retrieve the data and inspect it, showing the shape and
             some illustrative values.*
		
   >>> q, t = cf.read('file.nc')
   >>> t.data
   <CF Data(1, 10, 9): [[[262.8, ..., 269.7]]] K>

The `cf.Data` instance provides access to the full array of values, as
well as attributes to describe the array and methods for describing
any :ref:`data compression <Compression>`. However, the field
construct (and any other construct that contains data) also provides
attributes for direct access.

.. code-block:: python
   :caption: *Retrieve a numpy array of the data.*
      
   >>> print(t.array)
   [[[262.8 270.5 279.8 269.5 260.9 265.0 263.5 278.9 269.2]
     [272.7 268.4 279.5 278.9 263.8 263.3 274.2 265.7 279.5]
     [269.7 279.1 273.4 274.2 279.6 270.2 280.  272.5 263.7]
     [261.7 260.6 270.8 260.3 265.6 279.4 276.9 267.6 260.6]
     [264.2 275.9 262.5 264.9 264.7 270.2 270.4 268.6 275.3]
     [263.9 263.8 272.1 263.7 272.2 264.2 260.  263.5 270.2]
     [273.8 273.1 268.5 272.3 264.3 278.7 270.6 273.0 270.6]
     [267.9 273.5 279.8 260.3 261.2 275.3 271.2 260.8 268.9]
     [270.9 278.7 273.2 261.7 271.6 265.8 273.  278.5 266.4]
     [276.4 264.2 276.3 266.1 276.1 268.1 277.  273.4 269.7]]]
   
.. code-block:: python
   :caption: *Inspect the data type, number of dimensions, dimension
             sizes and number of elements of the data.*
	     
   >>> t.dtype
   dtype('float64')
   >>> t.ndim
   3
   >>> t.shape
   (1, 10, 9)
   >>> t.size
   90

The field construct also has a `~Field.get_data` method as an
alternative means of retrieving the data instance, which allows for a
default to be returned if no data have been set; as well as a
`~Field.del_data` method for removing the data.

All of the methods and attributes related to the data are listed
:ref:`here <Field-Data>`.

.. _Data-axes:

Data axes
^^^^^^^^^

The data array of the field construct spans all the domain axis
constructs with the possible exception of size one domain axis
constructs. The domain axis constructs spanned by the field
construct's data are found with the `~Field.get_data_axes` method of
the field construct. For example, the data of the field construct
``t`` does not span the size one domain axis construct with key
``'domainaxis3'``.

.. code-block:: python
   :caption: *Show which data axis constructs are spanned by the field
             construct's data.*
	    
   >>> print(t.domain_axes)
   Constructs:
   {'domainaxis0': <CF DomainAxis: size(1)>,
    'domainaxis1': <CF DomainAxis: size(10)>,
    'domainaxis2': <CF DomainAxis: size(9)>,
    'domainaxis3': <CF DomainAxis: size(1)>}
   >>> t
   <CF Field: air_temperature(atmosphere_hybrid_height_coordinate(1), grid_latitude(10), grid_longitude(9)) K>
   >>> t.data.shape
   (1, 10, 9)
   >>> t.get_data_axes()
   ('domainaxis0', 'domainaxis1', 'domainaxis2')

The data may be set with the `~Field.set_data` method of the field
construct. The domain axis constructs spanned by the data are inferred
from the existing domain axis constructs, provided that there are no
ambiguities (such as two dimensions of the same size), in which case
they can be explicitly provided via their construct keys. In any case,
the data axes may be set at any time with the `~Field.set_data_axes`
method of the field construct.

.. code-block:: python
   :caption: *Delete the data and then reinstate it, using the
             existing data axes.*
	    
   >>> data = t.del_data()
   >>> t.has_data()
   False
   >>> t.set_data(data)
   >>> t.data
   <CF Data(1, 10, 9): [[[262.8, ..., 269.7]]] K>

See the section :ref:`field construct creation <Field-creation>` for
more examples.


.. _Date-time:

Date-time
^^^^^^^^^

Data representing date-times is defined as elapsed times since a
reference date-time in a particular calendar (Gregorian, by
default). The `~cf.Data.array` attribute of the `cf.Data` instance
(and any construct that contains it) returns the elapsed times, and
the `~cf.Data.datetime_array` (and any construct that contains it)
returns the data as an array of date-time objects.

.. code-block:: python
   :caption: *View date-times as elapsed time or as date-time
             objects.*
	     
   >>> d = cf.Data([1, 2, 3], units='days since 2004-2-28')
   >>> print(d.array)   
   [1 2 3]
   >>> print(d.datetime_array)
   [cftime.DatetimeGregorian(2004-02-29 00:00:00)
    cftime.DatetimeGregorian(2004-03-01 00:00:00)
    cftime.DatetimeGregorian(2004-03-02 00:00:00)]
   >>> e = cf.Data([1, 2, 3], units='days since 2004-2-28', calendar='360_day')
   >>> print(e.array)   
   [1 2 3]
   >>> print(e.datetime_array)
   [cftime.Datetime360Day(2004-02-29 00:00:00)
    cftime.Datetime360Day(2004-02-30 00:00:00)
    cftime.Datetime360Day(2004-03-01 00:00:00)]

Alternatively, date-time data may be created by providing date-time
objects or `ISO 8601-like date-time strings
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/ISO_8601>`_. Date-time objects may be
`cftime.datetime` instances (as returned by the `cf.dt` and
`cf.dt_vector` functions), Python `datetime.datetime` instances, or
any other date-time object that has an equivalent API.

.. code-block:: python
   :caption: *Creating a Data instance from a date-time objects.*

   >>> date_time = cf.dt(2004, 2, 29)
   >>> date_time
   cftime.datetime(2004-02-29 00:00:00)
   >>> d = cf.Data(date_time, calendar='gregorian')
   >>> print(d.array)   
   0.0
   >>> d.datetime_array
   array(cftime.DatetimeGregorian(2004-02-29 00:00:00), dtype=object)

.. code-block:: python
   :caption: *Creating Data instances from date-time an array of
             date-time objects.*

   >>> date_times  = cf.dt_vector(['2004-02-29', '2004-02-30', '2004-03-01'], calendar='360_day')
   >>> print (date_times)
   [cftime.Datetime360Day(2004-02-29 00:00:00)
    cftime.Datetime360Day(2004-02-30 00:00:00)
    cftime.Datetime360Day(2004-03-01 00:00:00)]
   >>> e = cf.Data(date_times)
   >>> print(e.array)   
   [0. 1. 2.]
   >>> print(e.datetime_array)
   [cftime.Datetime360Day(2004-02-29 00:00:00)
    cftime.Datetime360Day(2004-02-30 00:00:00)
    cftime.Datetime360Day(2004-03-01 00:00:00)]
    
.. code-block:: python
   :caption: *Creating Data instances from date-time strings. If no
             units or calendar are provided then the "dt" keyword is
             required.*

   >>> d = cf.Data(['2004-02-29', '2004-02-30', '2004-03-01'], calendar='360_day')
   >>> d.Units
   <Units: days since 2004-02-29 360_day>
   >>> print(d.array)
   [0. 1. 2.]
   >>> print(d.datetime_array)
   [cftime.Datetime360Day(2004-02-29 00:00:00)
    cftime.Datetime360Day(2004-02-30 00:00:00)
    cftime.Datetime360Day(2004-03-01 00:00:00)]
   >>> e = cf.Data(['2004-02-29', '2004-03-01', '2004-03-02'], dt=True)
   >>> e.Units
   <Units: days since 2004-02-29>
   >>> print(e.datetime_array)
   [cftime.DatetimeGregorian(2004-02-29 00:00:00)
    cftime.DatetimeGregorian(2004-03-01 00:00:00)
    cftime.DatetimeGregorian(2004-03-02 00:00:00)]
   >>> f = cf.Data(['2004-02-29', '2004-03-01', '2004-03-02'])
   >>> print(f.array)
   ['2004-02-29' '2004-03-01' '2004-03-02']
   >>> f.Units
   <Units: >
   >>> print(f.datetime_array)  # Raises Exception
   Traceback (most recent call last):
       ...
   ValueError: Can't create date-time array from units <Units: >

    
.. _Manipulating-dimensions:

Manipulating dimensions
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The dimensions of a field construct's data may be reordered, have size
one dimensions removed and have new new size one dimensions included
by using the following field construct methods:

=========================  ===========================================
Method                     Description
=========================  ===========================================
`~Field.flatten`           Flatten domain axes of the field construct

`~Field.flip`              Reverse the direction of a data dimension

`~Field.insert_dimension`  Insert a new size one data dimension. The
                           new dimension must correspond to an
                           existing size one domain axis construct.

`~Field.squeeze`           Remove size one data dimensions
	   
`~Field.transpose`         Reorder data dimensions

`~Field.unsqueeze`         Insert all missing size one data dimensions
=========================  ===========================================

.. code-block:: python
   :caption: *Remove all size one dimensions from the data, noting
             that metadata constructs which span the corresponding
             domain axis construct are not affected.*

   >>> q, t = cf.read('file.nc')
   >>> t
   <CF Field: air_temperature(atmosphere_hybrid_height_coordinate(1), grid_latitude(10), grid_longitude(9)) K>
   >>> t2 = t.squeeze()
   >>> t2
   <CF Field: air_temperature(grid_latitude(10), grid_longitude(9)) K>
   >>> print(t2.dimension_coordinates)
   Constructs:
   {'dimensioncoordinate0': <CF DimensionCoordinate: atmosphere_hybrid_height_coordinate(1) >,
    'dimensioncoordinate1': <CF DimensionCoordinate: grid_latitude(10) degrees>,
    'dimensioncoordinate2': <CF DimensionCoordinate: grid_longitude(9) degrees>,
    'dimensioncoordinate3': <CF DimensionCoordinate: time(1) days since 2018-12-01 >}

.. code-block:: python
   :caption: *Insert a new size one dimension, corresponding to a size
             one domain axis construct, and then reorder the
             dimensions.*

   >>> t3 = t2.insert_dimension(axis='domainaxis3', position=1)
   >>> t3
   <CF Field: air_temperature(grid_latitude(10), time(1), grid_longitude(9)) K>
   >>> t3.transpose([2, 0, 1])
   <CF Field: air_temperature(grid_longitude(9), grid_latitude(10), time(1)) K>

When transposing the data dimensions, the dimensions of metadata
construct data are, by default, unchanged. It is also possible to
permute the data dimensions of the metadata constructs so that they
have the same relative order as the field construct:

.. code-block:: python
   :caption: *Also permute the data dimension of metadata constructs
             using the 'constructs' keyword.*

   >>> t4 = t.transpose(['X', 'Z', 'Y'], constructs=True)

.. _Data-mask:
   
Data mask
^^^^^^^^^

There is always a data mask, which may be thought of as a separate
data array of Booleans with the same shape as the original data. The
data mask is `False` where the the data has values, and `True` where
the data is missing. The data mask may be inspected with the
`~Field.mask` attribute of the field construct, which returns the data
mask in a field construct with the same metadata constructs as the
original field construct.


.. code-block:: python
   :caption: *Inspect the data mask of a field construct.*

   >>> print(q)
   Field: specific_humidity (ncvar%q)
   ----------------------------------
   Data            : specific_humidity(latitude(5), longitude(8)) 1
   Cell methods    : area: mean
   Dimension coords: latitude(5) = [-75.0, ..., 75.0] degrees_north
                   : longitude(8) = [22.5, ..., 337.5] degrees_east
                   : time(1) = [2019-01-01 00:00:00]
   >>> print(q.mask)
   Field: long_name=mask
   ---------------------
   Data            : long_name=mask(latitude(5), longitude(8))
   Cell methods    : area: mean
   Dimension coords: latitude(5) = [-75.0, ..., 75.0] degrees_north
                   : longitude(8) = [22.5, ..., 337.5] degrees_east
                   : time(1) = [2019-01-01 00:00:00]
   >>> print(q.mask.array)
   [[False False False False False False False False]
    [False False False False False False False False]
    [False False False False False False False False]
    [False False False False False False False False]
    [False False False False False False False False]]

.. code-block:: python
   :caption: *Mask the polar rows (see the "Assignment by index"
             section) and inspect the new data mask.*
	  
   >>> q[[0, 4], :] = cf.masked            
   >>> print(q.mask.array)
   [[ True  True  True  True  True  True  True  True]
    [False False False False False False False False]
    [False False False False False False False False]
    [False False False False False False False False]
    [ True  True  True  True  True  True  True  True]]

The `~Field._FillValue` and `~Field.missing_value` attributes of the
field construct are *not* stored as values of the field construct's
data. They are only used when :ref:`writing the data to a netCDF
dataset <Writing-to-a-netCDF-dataset>`. Therefore testing for missing
data by testing for equality to one of these property values will
produce incorrect results; the `~Field.any` and `~Field.all` methods
of the field construct should be used instead.

.. code-block:: python
   :caption: *See if all, or any, data points are masked.*
	     
   >>> q.mask.all()
   False
   >>> q.mask.any()
   True

The mask of a netCDF dataset array is implied by array values that
meet the criteria implied by the ``missing_value``, ``_FillValue``,
``valid_min``, ``valid_max``, and ``valid_range`` properties, and is
usually applied automatically by `cf.read`. NetCDF data elements that
equal the values of the ``missing_value`` and ``_FillValue``
properties are masked, as are data elements that exceed the value of
the ``valid_max`` property, subceed the value of the ``valid_min``
property, or lie outside of the range defined by the ``valid_range``
property.

However, this automatic masking may be bypassed by setting the *mask*
keyword of the `cf.read` function to `False`. The mask, as defined in
the dataset, may subsequently be applied manually with the
`~Field.apply_masking` method of the field construct.
   
.. code-block:: python
   :caption: *Read a dataset from disk without automatic masking, and
             then manually apply the mask*

   >>> cf.write(q, 'masked_q.nc')
   >>> no_mask_q = cf.read('masked_q.nc', mask=False)[0]
   >>> print(no_mask_q.array)
   [9.96920997e+36, 9.96920997e+36, 9.96920997e+36, 9.96920997e+36,
    9.96920997e+36, 9.96920997e+36, 9.96920997e+36, 9.96920997e+36],
    [0.023 0.036 0.045 0.062 0.046 0.073 0.006 0.066]
    [0.11  0.131 0.124 0.146 0.087 0.103 0.057 0.011]
    [0.029 0.059 0.039 0.07  0.058 0.072 0.009 0.017]
   [9.96920997e+36, 9.96920997e+36, 9.96920997e+36, 9.96920997e+36,
    9.96920997e+36, 9.96920997e+36, 9.96920997e+36, 9.96920997e+36]])
   >>> masked_q = no_mask_q.apply_masking()
   >>> print(masked_q.array)
   [[   --    --    --    --    --    --    --    --]
    [0.023 0.036 0.045 0.062 0.046 0.073 0.006 0.066]
    [0.11  0.131 0.124 0.146 0.087 0.103 0.057 0.011]
    [0.029 0.059 0.039 0.07  0.058 0.072 0.009 0.017]
    [   --    --    --    --    --    --    --    --]]
     
The `~Field.apply_masking` method of the field construct utilises as
many of the ``missing_value``, ``_FillValue``, ``valid_min``,
``valid_max``, and ``valid_range`` properties as are present and may
be used on any construct, not just those that have been read from
datasets.
    
----

.. _Subspacing-by-index:

**Subspacing by index**
-----------------------

Creation of a new field construct which spans a subspace of the domain
of an existing field construct is achieved either by indexing the
field construct directly (as described in this section) or by
identifying indices based on the metadata constructs (see
:ref:`Subspacing-by-metadata`). The subspacing operation, in either
case, also subspaces any metadata constructs of the field construct
(e.g. coordinate metadata constructs) which span any of the domain
axis constructs that are affected. The new field construct is created
with the same properties as the original field construct.

Subspacing by indexing uses rules that are very similar to the `numpy
indexing rules
<https://docs.scipy.org/doc/numpy/reference/arrays.indexing.html>`_,
the only differences being:

* An integer index *i* specified for a dimension reduces the size of
  this dimension to unity, taking just the *i*\ -th element, but keeps
  the dimension itself, so that the rank of the array is not reduced.

..

* When two or more dimensions' indices are sequences of integers then
  these indices work independently along each dimension (similar to
  the way vector subscripts work in FORTRAN). This is the same
  indexing behaviour as on a ``Variable`` object of the `netCDF4
  package <http://unidata.github.io/netcdf4-python>`_.

..

* For a dimension that is :ref:`cyclic <Cyclic-domain-axes>`, a range
  of indices specified by a `slice` that spans the edges of the data
  (such as ``-2:3`` or ``3:-2:-1``) is assumed to "wrap" around,
  rather then producing a null result.
  
.. code-block:: python
   :caption: *Create a new field construct whose domain spans the first
            longitude of the original, and with a reversed latitude
            axis.*

   >>> q, t = cf.read('file.nc')
   >>> print(q)
   Field: specific_humidity (ncvar%q)
   ----------------------------------
   Data            : specific_humidity(latitude(5), longitude(8)) 1
   Cell methods    : area: mean
   Dimension coords: time(1) = [2019-01-01 00:00:00]
                   : latitude(5) = [-75.0, ..., 75.0] degrees_north
                   : longitude(8) = [22.5, ..., 337.5] degrees_east

   >>> new = q[::-1, 0]
   >>> print(new)
   Field: specific_humidity (ncvar%q)
   ----------------------------------
   Data            : specific_humidity(latitude(5), longitude(1)) 1
   Cell methods    : area: mean
   Dimension coords: time(1) = [2019-01-01 00:00:00]
                   : latitude(5) = [75.0, ..., -75.0] degrees_north
                   : longitude(1) = [22.5] degrees_east

.. code-block:: python
   :caption: *Create new field constructs with a variety of indexing
             techniques.*

   >>> t
   <CF Field: air_temperature(atmosphere_hybrid_height_coordinate(1), grid_latitude(10), grid_longitude(9)) K>
   >>> t[:, :, 1]
   <CF Field: air_temperature(atmosphere_hybrid_height_coordinate(1), grid_latitude(10), grid_longitude(1)) K>
   >>> t[:, 0]
   <CF Field: air_temperature(atmosphere_hybrid_height_coordinate(1), grid_latitude(1), grid_longitude(9)) K>
   >>> t[..., 6:3:-1, 3:6]
   <CF Field: air_temperature(atmosphere_hybrid_height_coordinate(1), grid_latitude(3), grid_longitude(3)) K>
   >>> t[0, [2, 3, 9], [4, 8]]
   <CF Field: air_temperature(atmosphere_hybrid_height_coordinate(1), grid_latitude(3), grid_longitude(2)) K>
   >>> t[0, :, -2]
   <CF Field: air_temperature(atmosphere_hybrid_height_coordinate(1), grid_latitude(10), grid_longitude(1)) K>
   >>> t[..., [True, False, True, True, False, False, True, False, False]]
   <CF Field: air_temperature(atmosphere_hybrid_height_coordinate(1), grid_latitude(10), grid_longitude(4)) K>


.. code-block:: python
   :caption: *Subspacing a cyclic dimension with a slice will wrap
             around the data edges.*
	     
   >>> q
   <CF Field: specific_humidity(latitude(5), longitude(8)) 1>
   >>> q.cyclic()
   {'domainaxis1'}
   >>> q.constructs.domain_axis_identity('domainaxis1')
   'longitude'
   >>> print(q[:, -2:3])                                           
   Field: specific_humidity (ncvar%q)
   ----------------------------------
   Data            : specific_humidity(latitude(5), longitude(5)) 1
   Cell methods    : area: mean
   Dimension coords: latitude(5) = [-75.0, ..., 75.0] degrees_north
                   : longitude(5) = [-67.5, ..., 112.5] degrees_east
                   : time(1) = [2019-01-01 00:00:00]
   >>> print(q[:, 3:-2:-1])
   Field: specific_humidity (ncvar%q)
   ----------------------------------
   Data            : specific_humidity(latitude(5), longitude(5)) 1
   Cell methods    : area: mean
   Dimension coords: latitude(5) = [-75.0, ..., 75.0] degrees_north
                   : longitude(5) = [157.5, ..., -22.5] degrees_east
                   : time(1) = [2019-01-01 00:00:00]

   
A `cf.Data` instance can also directly be indexed in the same way:

.. code-block:: python
   :caption: *Create a new 'Data' instance by indexing.*
	     
   >>> t.data[0, [2, 3, 9], [4, 8]]
   <CF Data(1, 3, 2): [[[279.6, ..., 269.7]]] K>

----
   
.. _Assignment-by-index:

**Assignment by index**
-----------------------

Data elements can be changed by assigning to elements selected by
indices of the data (as described in this section); by conditions
based on the data values of the field construct or one of its metadata
constructs (see :ref:`Assignment-by-condition`); or by identifying
indices based on arbitrary metadata constructs (see
:ref:`Assignment-by-metadata`).

Assignment by indices uses rules that are very similar to the `numpy
indexing rules
<https://docs.scipy.org/doc/numpy/reference/arrays.indexing.html>`_,
the only difference being:

* When two or more dimensions' indices are sequences of integers then
  these indices work independently along each dimension (similar to
  the way vector subscripts work in FORTRAN). This is the same
  indexing behaviour as on a ``Variable`` object of the `netCDF4
  package <http://unidata.github.io/netcdf4-python>`_.

..

* For a dimension that is :ref:`cyclic <Cyclic-domain-axes>`, a range
  of indices specified by a `slice` that spans the edges of the data
  (such as ``-2:3`` or ``3:-2:-1``) is assumed to "wrap" around,
  rather then producing a null result.

A single value may be assigned to any number of elements.
  
.. code-block:: python
   :caption: *Set a single element to -1, a "column" of elements
             to -2 and a "square" of elements to -3.*
	     
   >>> q, t = cf.read('file.nc')
   >>> t[:, 0, 0] = -1
   >>> t[:, :, 1] = -2
   >>> t[..., 6:3:-1, 3:6] = -3
   >>> print(t.array)
   [[[ -1.0  -2.0 279.8 269.5 260.9 265.0 263.5 278.9 269.2]
     [272.7  -2.0 279.5 278.9 263.8 263.3 274.2 265.7 279.5]
     [269.7  -2.0 273.4 274.2 279.6 270.2 280.0 272.5 263.7]
     [261.7  -2.0 270.8 260.3 265.6 279.4 276.9 267.6 260.6]
     [264.2  -2.0 262.5  -3.0  -3.0  -3.0 270.4 268.6 275.3]
     [263.9  -2.0 272.1  -3.0  -3.0  -3.0 260.0 263.5 270.2]
     [273.8  -2.0 268.5  -3.0  -3.0  -3.0 270.6 273.0 270.6]
     [267.9  -2.0 279.8 260.3 261.2 275.3 271.2 260.8 268.9]
     [270.9  -2.0 273.2 261.7 271.6 265.8 273.0 278.5 266.4]
     [276.4  -2.0 276.3 266.1 276.1 268.1 277.0 273.4 269.7]]]

An array of values can be assigned, as long as it is broadcastable to
the shape defined by the indices, using the `numpy broadcasting
rules`_.

.. code-block:: python
   :caption: *Assigning arrays of values.*
	     
   >>> import numpy
   >>> t[..., 6:3:-1, 3:6] = numpy.arange(9).reshape(3, 3)
   >>> t[0, [2, 9], [4, 8]] =  cf.Data([[-4, -5]])
   >>> t[0, [4, 7], 0] = [[-10], [-11]]
   >>> print(t.array)
   [[[ -1.0  -2.0 279.8 269.5 260.9 265.0 263.5 278.9 269.2]
     [272.7  -2.0 279.5 278.9 263.8 263.3 274.2 265.7 279.5]
     [269.7  -2.0 273.4 274.2  -4.0 270.2 280.0 272.5  -5.0]
     [261.7  -2.0 270.8 260.3 265.6 279.4 276.9 267.6 260.6]
     [-10.0  -2.0 262.5   6.0   7.0   8.0 270.4 268.6 275.3]
     [263.9  -2.0 272.1   3.0   4.0   5.0 260.0 263.5 270.2]
     [273.8  -2.0 268.5   0.0   1.0   2.0 270.6 273.0 270.6]
     [-11.0  -2.0 279.8 260.3 261.2 275.3 271.2 260.8 268.9]
     [270.9  -2.0 273.2 261.7 271.6 265.8 273.0 278.5 266.4]
     [276.4  -2.0 276.3 266.1  -4.0 268.1 277.0 273.4  -5.0]]]


In-place modification is also possible:

.. code-block:: python
   :caption: *Modifying the data in-place.*
	     
   >>> print(t[0, 0, -1].array)
   [[[269.2]]]
   >>> t[0, 0, -1] /= -10
   >>> print(t[0, 0, -1].array)
   [[[-26.92]]]

A `cf.Data` instance can also assigned values in the same way:

.. code-block:: python
   :caption: *Assign to the 'Data' instance directly.*
	     
   >>> t.data[0, 0, -1] = -99
   >>> print(t[0, 0, -1].array)
   [[[-99.]]]


.. _Masked-values:
     
Masked values
^^^^^^^^^^^^^
 
Data array elements may be set to masked values by assigning them to
the `cf.masked` constant, thereby updating the the :ref:`data mask
<Data-mask>`.

.. code-block:: python
   :caption: *Set a column of elements to masked values.*
	     
   >>> t[0, :, -2] = cf.masked
   >>> print(t.array)
   [[[ -1.0  -2.0 279.8 269.5 260.9 265.0 263.5    -- -99.0]
     [272.7  -2.0 279.5 278.9 263.8 263.3 274.2    -- 279.5]
     [269.7  -2.0 273.4 274.2  -4.0 270.2 280.0    --  -5.0]
     [261.7  -2.0 270.8 260.3 265.6 279.4 276.9    -- 260.6]
     [264.2  -2.0 262.5   6.0   7.0   8.0 270.4    -- 275.3]
     [263.9  -2.0 272.1   3.0   4.0   5.0 260.0    -- 270.2]
     [273.8  -2.0 268.5   0.0   1.0   2.0 270.6    -- 270.6]
     [-11.0  -2.0 279.8 260.3 261.2 275.3 271.2    -- 268.9]
     [270.9  -2.0 273.2 261.7 271.6 265.8 273.0    -- 266.4]
     [276.4  -2.0 276.3 266.1  -4.0 268.1 277.0    --  -5.0]]]

By default the data mask is "hard", meaning that masked values can not
be changed by assigning them to another value. This behaviour may be
changed by setting the `~cf.Field.hardmask` attribute of the field
construct to `False`, thereby making the data mask "soft".

.. code-block:: python
   :caption: *Changing masked elements back to data values is only
             possible when the "hardmask" attribute is False.*
	     
   >>> t[0, 4, -2] = 99
   >>> print(t[0, 4, -2].array)
   [[[--]]]
   >>> t.hardmask = False
   >>> t[0, 4, -2] = 99
   >>> print(t[0, 4, -2].array)
   [[[99.]]]

Note that this is the opposite behaviour to `numpy` arrays, which
assume that the mask is `soft by default
<https://docs.scipy.org/doc/numpy/reference/maskedarray.generic.html#modifying-the-mask>`_. The
reason for the difference is so that land-sea masks are, by default,
preserved through assignment operations.

.. _Assignment-from-other-field-constructs:
     
Assignment from other field constructs
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Another field construct can also be assigned to indices. The other
field construct's data is actually assigned, but only after being
transformed so that it is broadcastable to the subspace defined by the
assignment indices. This is done by using the metadata constructs of
the two field constructs to create a mapping of physically compatible
dimensions between the fields, and then :ref:`manipulating the
dimensions <Manipulating-dimensions>` of the other field construct's
data to ensure that they are broadcastable.

.. code-block:: python
   :caption: *Transform a field construct's data and assign it back to
             the original field, demonstrating that this is a null
             operation.*
	     
   >>> q, t = cf.read('file.nc')
   >>> t0 = t.copy()	     
   >>> u = t.squeeze(0)
   >>> u.transpose(inplace=True)
   >>> u.flip(inplace=True)   
   >>> t[...] = u
   >>> t.allclose(t0)
   True

.. code-block:: python
   :caption: *Broadcasting is carried out after transforms to ensure
             field construct compatibility.*
	     
   >>> print(t[:, :, 1:3].array)
   [[[270.5 279.8]
      [268.4 279.5]
      [279.1 273.4]
      [260.6 270.8]
      [275.9 262.5]
      [263.8 272.1]
      [273.1 268.5]
      [273.5 279.8]
      [278.7 273.2]
      [264.2 276.3]]]
   >>> print(u[2].array)	     
   [[277.  273.  271.2 270.6 260.  270.4 276.9 280.  274.2 263.5]]
   >>> t[:, :, 1:3] = u[2]
   >>> print(t[:, :, 1:3].array)
   [[[263.5 263.5]
     [274.2 274.2]
     [280.  280. ]
     [276.9 276.9]
     [270.4 270.4]
     [260.  260. ]
     [270.6 270.6]
     [271.2 271.2]
     [273.  273. ]
     [277.  277. ]]]
     
If either of the field constructs does not have sufficient metadata to
create the such a mapping, then any manipulation of the dimensions
must be done manually, and the other field construct's `cf.Data` instance
(rather than the field construct itself) may be assigned.

----

.. Units:

**Units**
---------

The field construct, and any metadata construct that contains data,
has units which are described by the `~Field.Units` attribute that
stores a `cf.Units` object (which is identical to a `cfunits.Units`
object of the `cfunits package
<https://ncas-cms.github.io/cfunits>`_). The `~Field.units` property
provides the units contained in the `cf.Units` instance, and changes
in one are reflected in the other.

.. code-block:: python
   :caption: *Inspection and changing of units.*
	     
   >>> q, t = cf.read('file.nc')
   >>> t.units
   'K'
   >>> t.Units
   <Units: K>
   >>> t.units = 'degreesC'
   >>> t.units
   'degreesC'
   >>> t.Units
   <Units: degreesC>
   >>> t.Units += 273.15
   >>> t.units
   'K'
   >>> t.Units
   <Units: K>

When the units are changed, the data are automatically converted to
the new units when next accessed.

.. code-block:: python
   :caption: *Changing the units automatically results in conversion of
             the data values.*

   >>> t.data
   <CF Data(1, 10, 9): [[[262.8, ..., 269.7]]] K>
   >>> t.Units = cf.Units('degreesC')
   >>> t.data
   <CF Data(1, 10, 9): [[[-10.35, ..., -3.45]]] degreesC>
   >>> t.units = 'Kelvin'
   >>> t.data
   <CF Data(1, 10, 9): [[[262.8, ..., 269.7]]] Kelvin>

When assigning to the data with values that have units, the values are
automatically converted to have the same units as the data.

.. code-block:: python
   :caption: *Automatic conversions occur when assigning from data
             with different units.*
	     
   >>> t.data
   <CF Data(1, 10, 9): [[[262.8, ..., 269.7]]] Kelvin>
   >>> t[0, 0, 0] = cf.Data(1)
   >>> t.data
   <CF Data(1, 10, 9): [[[1.0, ..., 269.7]]] Kelvin>
   >>> t[0, 0, 0] = cf.Data(1, 'degreesC')
   >>> t.data
   <CF Data(1, 10, 9): [[[274.15, ..., 269.7]]] Kelvin>

Automatic units conversions are also carried out between operands
during :ref:`mathematical operations <Mathematical-operations>`.

.. _Calendar:

Calendar
^^^^^^^^

When the data represents date-times, the `cf.Units` instance describes
both the units and calendar of the data. If the latter is missing then
the Gregorian calendar is assumed, as per the CF conventions.  The
`~Field.calendar` property provides the calendar contained in the
`cf.Units` instance, and changes in one are reflected in the other.

.. code-block:: python
   :caption: *The calendar of date-times is available as a property or
             via the Units instance.*
	     
   >>> air_temp = cf.read('air_temperature.nc')[0]
   >>> time = air_temp.coordinate('time')
   >>> time.units
   'days since 1860-1-1'
   >>> time.calendar
   '360_day'
   >>> time.Units
   <Units: days since 1860-1-1 360_day>

----

.. _Filtering-metadata-constructs:

**Filtering metadata constructs**
---------------------------------

A `cf.Constructs` instance has filtering methods for selecting
constructs that meet various criteria:

================================  ==========================================================================  
Method                            Filter criteria                                                             
================================  ==========================================================================  
`~Constructs.filter_by_identity`  Metadata construct identity                
`~Constructs.filter_by_type`      Metadata construct type                       
`~Constructs.filter_by_property`  Property values                                     
`~Constructs.filter_by_axis`      The domain axis constructs spanned by the data
`~Constructs.filter_by_naxes`     The number of domain axis constructs spanned by the data
`~Constructs.filter_by_size`      The size domain axis constructs
`~Constructs.filter_by_measure`   Measure value (for cell measure constructs)
`~Constructs.filter_by_method`    Method value (for cell method constructs)	
`~Constructs.filter_by_data`      Whether or not there could be be data.
`~Constructs.filter_by_key`       Construct key			
`~Constructs.filter_by_ncvar`     NetCDF variable name (see the :ref:`netCDF interface <NetCDF-interface>`)
`~Constructs.filter_by_ncdim`     NetCDF dimension name (see the :ref:`netCDF interface <NetCDF-interface>`)
================================  ==========================================================================  

Each of these methods returns a new `cf.Constructs` instance that
contains the selected metadata constructs.

.. code-block:: python
   :caption: *Get constructs by their type*.

   >>> q, t = cf.read('file.nc')
   >>> print(t.constructs.filter_by_type('dimension_coordinate'))
   Constructs:
   {'dimensioncoordinate0': <CF DimensionCoordinate: atmosphere_hybrid_height_coordinate(1) >,
    'dimensioncoordinate1': <CF DimensionCoordinate: grid_latitude(10) degrees>,
    'dimensioncoordinate2': <CF DimensionCoordinate: grid_longitude(9) degrees>,
    'dimensioncoordinate3': <CF DimensionCoordinate: time(1) days since 2018-12-01 >}
   >>> print(t.constructs.filter_by_type('cell_method', 'field_ancillary'))
   Constructs:
   {'cellmethod0': <CF CellMethod: domainaxis1: domainaxis2: mean where land (interval: 0.1 degrees)>,
    'cellmethod1': <CF CellMethod: domainaxis3: maximum>,
    'fieldancillary0': <CF FieldAncillary: air_temperature standard_error(10, 9) K>}

.. code-block:: python
   :caption: *Get constructs by their properties*.

   >>> print(t.constructs.filter_by_property(
   ...             standard_name='air_temperature standard_error'))
   Constructs:
   {'fieldancillary0': <CF FieldAncillary: air_temperature standard_error(10, 9) K>}
   >>> print(t.constructs.filter_by_property(
   ...             standard_name='air_temperature standard_error',
   ...             units='K'))
   Constructs:
   {'fieldancillary0': <CF FieldAncillary: air_temperature standard_error(10, 9) K>}
   >>> print(t.constructs.filter_by_property(
   ...             'or',
   ...	           standard_name='air_temperature standard_error',
   ...             units='m'))
   Constructs:
   {'domainancillary0': <CF DomainAncillary: ncvar%a(1) m>,
    'domainancillary2': <CF DomainAncillary: surface_altitude(10, 9) m>,
    'fieldancillary0': <CF FieldAncillary: air_temperature standard_error(10, 9) K>}
   
.. code-block:: python
   :caption: *Get constructs whose data span the 'domainaxis1' domain
             axis construct; and those which also do not span the
             'domainaxis2' domain axis construct.*

   >>> print(t.constructs.filter_by_axis('and', 'domainaxis1'))
   Constructs:
   {'auxiliarycoordinate0': <CF AuxiliaryCoordinate: latitude(10, 9) degrees_N>,
    'auxiliarycoordinate1': <CF AuxiliaryCoordinate: longitude(9, 10) degrees_E>,
    'auxiliarycoordinate2': <CF AuxiliaryCoordinate: long_name=Grid latitude name(10) >,
    'cellmeasure0': <CF CellMeasure: measure:area(9, 10) km2>,
    'dimensioncoordinate1': <CF DimensionCoordinate: grid_latitude(10) degrees>,
    'domainancillary2': <CF DomainAncillary: surface_altitude(10, 9) m>,
    'fieldancillary0': <CF FieldAncillary: air_temperature standard_error(10, 9) K>}

.. code-block:: python
   :caption: *Get cell measure constructs by their "measure".*
	     
   >>> print(t.constructs.filter_by_measure('area'))
   Constructs:
   {'cellmeasure0': <CF CellMeasure: measure:area(9, 10) km2>}

.. code-block:: python
   :caption: *Get cell method constructs by their "method".*
	     
   >>> print(t.constructs.filter_by_method('maximum'))
   Constructs:
   {'cellmethod1': <CF CellMethod: domainaxis3: maximum>}

As each of these methods returns a `cf.Constructs` instance, it is
easy to perform further filters on their results:
   
.. code-block:: python
   :caption: *Make selections from previous selections.*
	     
   >>> print(t.constructs.filter_by_type('auxiliary_coordinate').filter_by_axis('and', 'domainaxis2'))
   Constructs:
   {'auxiliarycoordinate0': <CF AuxiliaryCoordinate: latitude(10, 9) degrees_N>,
    'auxiliarycoordinate1': <CF AuxiliaryCoordinate: longitude(9, 10) degrees_E>}
   >>> c = t.constructs.filter_by_type('dimension_coordinate')
   >>> d = c.filter_by_property(units='degrees')
   >>> print(d)
   Constructs:
   {'dimensioncoordinate1': <CF DimensionCoordinate: grid_latitude(10) degrees>,
    'dimensioncoordinate2': <CF DimensionCoordinate: grid_longitude(9) degrees>}

.. _Construct-identities:
    
Construct identities
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Another method of selection is by metadata construct "identity".
Construct identities are used to describe constructs when they are
inspected, and so it is often convenient to copy these identities when
selecting metadata constructs. For example, the :ref:`three auxiliary
coordinate constructs <Medium-detail>` in the field construct ``t``
have identities ``'latitude'``, ``'longitude'`` and ``'long_name=Grid
latitude name'``.

A construct's identity may be any one of the following

* The value of the `!standard_name` property, e.g. ``'air_temperature'``,
* The value of the `!id` attribute, preceded by ``'id%='``,
* The physical nature of the construct denoted by ``'X'``, ``'Y'``,
  ``'Z'`` or ``'T'``, denoting longitude (or x-projection), latitude
  (or y-projection), vertical and temporal constructs respectively,
* The value of any property, preceded by the property name and an
  equals, e.g. ``'long_name=Air Temperature'``, ``'axis=X'``,
  ``'foo=bar'``, etc.,
* The cell measure, preceded by "measure:", e.g. ``'measure:volume'``
* The cell method, preceded by "method:", e.g. ``'method:maximum'``
* The netCDF variable name, preceded by "ncvar%",
  e.g. ``'ncvar%tas'`` (see the :ref:`netCDF interface
  <NetCDF-interface>`), 
* The netCDF dimension name, preceded by "ncdim%" e.g. ``'ncdim%z'``
  (see the :ref:`netCDF interface <NetCDF-interface>`), and 
* The construct key, optionally preceded by "key%",
  e.g. ``'auxiliarycoordinate2'`` or ``'key%auxiliarycoordinate2'``.

.. code-block:: python
   :caption: *Get constructs by their identity.*
	
   >>> print(t)
   Field: air_temperature (ncvar%ta)
   ---------------------------------
   Data            : air_temperature(atmosphere_hybrid_height_coordinate(1), grid_latitude(10), grid_longitude(9)) K
   Cell methods    : grid_latitude(10): grid_longitude(9): mean where land (interval: 0.1 degrees) time(1): maximum
   Field ancils    : air_temperature standard_error(grid_latitude(10), grid_longitude(9)) = [[0.81, ..., 0.78]] K
   Dimension coords: time(1) = [2019-01-01 00:00:00]
                   : atmosphere_hybrid_height_coordinate(1) = [1.5]
                   : grid_latitude(10) = [2.2, ..., -1.76] degrees
                   : grid_longitude(9) = [-4.7, ..., -1.18] degrees
   Auxiliary coords: latitude(grid_latitude(10), grid_longitude(9)) = [[53.941, ..., 50.225]] degrees_N
                   : longitude(grid_longitude(9), grid_latitude(10)) = [[2.004, ..., 8.156]] degrees_E
                   : long_name=Grid latitude name(grid_latitude(10)) = [--, ..., 'kappa']
   Cell measures   : measure:area(grid_longitude(9), grid_latitude(10)) = [[2391.9657, ..., 2392.6009]] km2
   Coord references: grid_mappng_name:rotated_latitude_longitude
                   : standard_name:atmosphere_hybrid_height_coordinate
   Domain ancils   : ncvar%a(atmosphere_hybrid_height_coordinate(1)) = [10.0] m
                   : ncvar%b(atmosphere_hybrid_height_coordinate(1)) = [20.0]
                   : surface_altitude(grid_latitude(10), grid_longitude(9)) = [[0.0, ..., 270.0]] m
   >>> print(t.constructs.filter_by_identity('X'))
   Constructs:
   {'auxiliarycoordinate1': <CF AuxiliaryCoordinate: longitude(9, 10) degrees_E>,
    'dimensioncoordinate2': <CF DimensionCoordinate: grid_longitude(9) degrees>}
   >>> print(t.constructs.filter_by_identity('latitude'))
   Constructs:
   {'auxiliarycoordinate0': <CF AuxiliaryCoordinate: latitude(10, 9) degrees_N>}
   >>> print(t.constructs.filter_by_identity('long_name=Grid latitude name'))
   Constructs:
   {'auxiliarycoordinate2': <CF AuxiliaryCoordinate: long_name=Grid latitude name(10) >}
   >>> print(t.constructs.filter_by_identity('measure:area'))
   Constructs:
   {'cellmeasure0': <CF CellMeasure: measure:area(9, 10) km2>}
   >>> print(t.constructs.filter_by_identity('ncvar%b'))
   Constructs:
   {'domainancillary1': <CF DomainAncillary: ncvar%b(1) >}

The identity returned by the `!identity` method is, by default, the
least ambiguous identity (defined in the method documentation), but it
may be restricted in various ways. See the *strict* and *relaxed*
keywords.
       
As a further convenience, selection by construct identity is also
possible by providing identities to a call of a `cf.Constructs`
instance itself, and this technique for selecting constructs by
identity will be used in the rest of this tutorial:

.. code-block:: python
   :caption: *Construct selection by identity is possible with via the
             "filter_by_identity" method, or directly from the
             "Constructs" instance.*

   >>> print(t.constructs.filter_by_identity('latitude'))
   Constructs:
   {'auxiliarycoordinate0': <CF AuxiliaryCoordinate: latitude(10, 9) degrees_N>}
   >>> print(t.constructs('latitude'))
   Constructs:
   {'auxiliarycoordinate0': <CF AuxiliaryCoordinate: latitude(10, 9) degrees_N>}

Selection by construct key is useful for systematic metadata construct
access, or for when a metadata construct is not identifiable by other
means:

.. code-block:: python
   :caption: *Get constructs by construct key.*

   >>> print(t.constructs.filter_by_key('domainancillary2'))
   Constructs:
   {'domainancillary2': <CF DomainAncillary: surface_altitude(10, 9) m>}
   >>> print(t.constructs.filter_by_key('cellmethod1'))
   Constructs:
   {'cellmethod1': <CF CellMethod: domainaxis3: maximum>}
   >>> print(t.constructs.filter_by_key('auxiliarycoordinate2', 'cellmeasure0'))
   Constructs:
   {'auxiliarycoordinate2': <CF AuxiliaryCoordinate: long_name=Grid latitude name(10) >,
    'cellmeasure0': <CF CellMeasure: measure:area(9, 10) km2>}

If no constructs match the given criteria, then an "empty"
`cf.Constructs` instance is returned:
   
.. code-block:: python
   :caption: *If no constructs meet the criteria then an empty
             "Constructs" object is returned.*

   >>> c = t.constructs('radiation_wavelength')
   >>> c
   <CF Constructs: >
   >>> print(c)
   Constructs:
   {}
   >>> len(c)
   0

The constructs that were *not* selected by a filter may be returned by
the `~Constructs.inverse_filter` method applied to the results of
filters:

.. code-block:: python
   :caption: *Get the constructs that were not selected by a filter.*

   >>> c = t.constructs.filter_by_type('auxiliary_coordinate')
   >>> c
   <CF Constructs: auxiliary_coordinate(3)>
   >>> c.inverse_filter()
   <CF Constructs: cell_measure(1), cell_method(2), coordinate_reference(2), dimension_coordinate(4), domain_ancillary(3), domain_axis(4), field_ancillary(1)>
  
Note that selection by construct type is equivalent to using the
particular method of the field construct for retrieving that type of
metadata construct:

.. code-block:: python
   :caption: *The bespoke methods for retrieving constructs by type
             are equivalent to a selection on all of the metadata
             constructs.*
		
   >>> print(t.constructs.filter_by_type('cell_measure'))
   Constructs:
   {'cellmeasure0': <CF CellMeasure: measure:area(9, 10) km2>}
   >>> print(t.cell_measures)
   Constructs:
   {'cellmeasure0': <CF CellMeasure: measure:area(9, 10) km2>}

----

.. _Metadata-construct-access:

**Metadata construct access**
-----------------------------

An individual metadata construct, or its construct key, may be
returned by any of the following techniques:

* with the `~Field.construct` method of a field construct,

.. code-block:: python
   :caption: *Get the "latitude" metadata construct via its construct
             identity, and also its key.*
	     
   >>> t.construct('latitude')
   <CF AuxiliaryCoordinate: latitude(10, 9) degrees_N>
   >>> t.construct('latitude', key=True)
   'auxiliarycoordinate0'

* with the `~Field.construct_key` and `~Field.get_construct` methods of
  a field construct:

.. code-block:: python
   :caption: *Get the "latitude" metadata construct key with its construct
             identity and use the key to get the construct itself*
	     
   >>> key = t.construct_key('latitude')
   >>> t.get_construct(key)
   <CF AuxiliaryCoordinate: latitude(10, 9) degrees_N>

* with the `~Constructs.value` method of a `cf.Constructs` instance
  that contains one construct,

.. code-block:: python
   :caption: *Get the "latitude" metadata construct via its identity
             and the 'value' method.*
	     
   >>> t.constructs('latitude').value()
   <CF AuxiliaryCoordinate: latitude(10, 9) degrees_N>

* with the `~Constructs.get` method of a `cf.Constructs` instance, or

.. code-block:: python
   :caption: *Get the "latitude" metadata construct via its construct
             key and the 'get' method.*
	     
   >>> t.constructs.get(key)
   <CF AuxiliaryCoordinate: latitude(10, 9) degrees_N>

* by indexing a `cf.Constructs` instance with  a construct key.

.. code-block:: python
   :caption: *Get the "latitude" metadata construct via its construct
             key and indexing*
	     
   >>> t.constructs[key]
   <CF AuxiliaryCoordinate: latitude(10, 9) degrees_N>

In addition, an individual metadata construct of a particular type can
be retrieved with the following methods of the field construct:

=============================  ====================  
Method                         Metadata construct
=============================  ====================  
`~Field.domain_axis`           Domain axis   
`~Field.dimension_coordinate`  Dimension coordinate
`~Field.auxiliary_coordinate`  Auxiliary coordinate
`~Field.coordinate_reference`  Coordinate reference
`~Field.domain_ancillary`      Domain ancillary
`~Field.cell_measure`          Cell measure        
`~Field.field_ancillary`       Field ancillary
`~Field.cell_method`           Cell method
=============================  ====================  

These methods will only look for the given identity amongst constructs
of the chosen type.

.. code-block:: python
   :caption: *Get the "latitude" auxiliary coordinate construct via
             its construct identity, and also its key.*
	     
   >>> t.auxiliary_coordinate('latitude')
   <CF AuxiliaryCoordinate: latitude(10, 9) degrees_N>
   >>> t.auxiliary_coordinate('latitude', key=True)
   'auxiliarycoordinate0'

The `~Field.construct` method of the field construct, the above
methods for finding a construct of a particular type, and the
`~Constructs.value` method of the `cf.Constructs` instance will all
raise an exception of there is not a unique metadata construct to
return, but this may be replaced with returning a default value or
raising a customised exception:
   
.. code-block:: python
   :caption: *By default an exception is raised if there is not a
             unique construct that meets the criteria. Alternatively,
             the value of the "default" parameter is returned.*

   >>> t.construct('measure:volume')  # Raises Exception
   Traceback (most recent call last):
       ...
   ValueError: Can't return zero constructs
   >>> t.construct('measure:volume', False)
   False
   >>> c = t.constructs.filter_by_measure('volume')
   >>> len(c)
   0
   >>> c.value()  # Raises Exception
   Traceback (most recent call last):
       ...
   ValueError: Can't return zero constructs
   >>> c.value(default='No construct')
   'No construct'
   >>> c.value(default=KeyError('My message'))  # Raises Exception
   Traceback (most recent call last):
       ...
   KeyError: 'My message'
   >>> d = t.constructs('units=degrees')
   >>> len(d)
   2
   >>> d.value()  # Raises Exception
   Traceback (most recent call last):
       ...
   ValueError: Can't return 2 constructs 
   >>> print(d.value(default=None))
   None

The `~Constructs.get` method of a `cf.Constructs` instance accepts an
optional second argument to be returned if the construct key does not
exist, exactly like the Python `dict.get` method.

.. _Metadata-construct-properties:

Metadata construct properties
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Metadata constructs share the :ref:`same API as the field construct
<Properties>` for accessing their properties:

.. code-block:: python
   :caption: *Retrieve the "longitude" metadata construct, set a new
             property, and then inspect all of the properties.*

   >>> lon = q.construct('longitude')
   >>> lon
   <CF DimensionCoordinate: longitude(8) degrees_east>
   >>> lon.set_property('long_name', 'Longitude')
   >>> lon.properties()
   {'units': 'degrees_east',
    'long_name': 'Longitude',
    'standard_name': 'longitude'}

.. code-block:: python
   :caption: *Get the metadata construct with units of "km2", find its
             canonical identity, and all of its valid identities, that
             may be used for selection by the "filter_by_identity"
             method*

   >>> area = t.constructs.filter_by_property(units='km2').value()
   >>> area
   <CF CellMeasure: measure:area(9, 10) km2>
   >>> area.identity()
   'measure:area'
   >>> area.identities()
   ['measure:area', 'units=km2', 'ncvar%cell_measure']

.. _Metadata-construct-data:

Metadata construct data
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Metadata constructs share the :ref:`a similar API as the field
construct <Data>` as the field construct for accessing their data:

.. code-block:: python
   :caption: *Retrieve the "longitude" metadata construct, inspect its
             data, change the third element of the array, and get the
             data as a numpy array.*
	     
   >>> lon = q.constructs('longitude').value()
   >>> lon
   <CF DimensionCoordinate: longitude(8) degrees_east>
   >>> lon.data
   <CF Data(8): [22.5, ..., 337.5] degrees_east>
   >>> lon.data[2]
   <CF Data(1): [112.5] degrees_east>
   >>> lon.data[2] = 133.33
   >>> print(lon.array)
   [ 22.5   67.5  133.33 157.5  202.5  247.5  292.5  337.5 ]
   >>> lon.data[2] = 112.5

The domain axis constructs spanned by a particular metadata
construct's data are found with the `~Constructs.get_data_axes` method
of the field construct:

.. code-block:: python
   :caption: *Find the construct keys of the domain axis constructs
             spanned by the data of each metadata construct.*

   >>> key = t.construct_key('latitude')
   >>> key
   'auxiliarycoordinate0'
   >>> t.get_data_axes(key)
   ('domainaxis1', 'domainaxis2')
    
The domain axis constructs spanned by all the data of all metadata
construct may be found with the `~Constructs.data_axes` method of the
field construct's `cf.Constructs` instance:

.. code-block:: python
   :caption: *Find the construct keys of the domain axis constructs
             spanned by the data of each metadata construct.*

   >>> t.constructs.data_axes()
   {'auxiliarycoordinate0': ('domainaxis1', 'domainaxis2'),
    'auxiliarycoordinate1': ('domainaxis2', 'domainaxis1'),
    'auxiliarycoordinate2': ('domainaxis1',),
    'cellmeasure0': ('domainaxis2', 'domainaxis1'),
    'dimensioncoordinate0': ('domainaxis0',),
    'dimensioncoordinate1': ('domainaxis1',),
    'dimensioncoordinate2': ('domainaxis2',),
    'dimensioncoordinate3': ('domainaxis3',),
    'domainancillary0': ('domainaxis0',),
    'domainancillary1': ('domainaxis0',),
    'domainancillary2': ('domainaxis1', 'domainaxis2'),
    'fieldancillary0': ('domainaxis1', 'domainaxis2')}

A size one domain axis construct that is *not* spanned by the field
construct's data may still be spanned by the data of metadata
constructs. For example, the data of the field construct ``t``
:ref:`does not span the size one domain axis construct <Data-axes>`
with key ``'domainaxis3'``, but this domain axis construct is spanned
by a "time" dimension coordinate construct (with key
``'dimensioncoordinate3'``). Such a dimension coordinate (i.e. one
that applies to a domain axis construct that is not spanned by the
field construct's data) corresponds to a CF-netCDF scalar coordinate
variable.

----

.. _Time:

**Time**
--------

Constructs (including the field constructs) that represent elapsed
time have data array values that provide elapsed time since a
reference date. These constructs are identified by the presence of
"reference time" units. The data values may be converted into the
date-time objects of the `cftime package
<https://unidata.github.io/cftime/>`_ with the `~Field.datetime_array`
attribute of the construct, or its `cf.Data` instance.

.. code-block:: python
   :caption: *Inspect the the values of a "time" construct as elapsed
             times and as date-times.*

   >>> time = q.construct('time')
   >>> time
   <CF DimensionCoordinate: time(1) days since 2018-12-01 >
   >>> time.get_property('units')
   'days since 2018-12-01'
   >>> time.get_property('calendar', default='standard')
   'standard'
   >>> print(time.array)
   [31.]
   >>> print(time.datetime_array)
   [cftime.DatetimeGregorian(2019-01-01 00:00:00)]


.. _Time-duration:

Time duration
^^^^^^^^^^^^^

A period of time may stored in a `cf.TimeDuration` object. For many
applications, a `cf.Data` instance with appropriate units (such as
``seconds``) is equivalent, but a `cf.TimeDuration` instance also
allows units of *calendar* years or months; and may be relative to a
date-time offset. 

.. code-block:: python
   :caption: *Define a duration of one calendar month which, if
             applicable, starts at 12:00 on the 16th of the month.*

   >>> cm = cf.TimeDuration(1, 'calendar_month', day=16, hour=12)              
   >>> cm
   <CF TimeDuration: P1M (Y-M-16 12:00:00)>

`cf.TimeDuration` objects support comparison and arithmetic operations
with numeric scalars, `cf.Data` instances and date-time objects:

.. code-block:: python
   :caption: *Add a calendar month to a date-time object, and a
             date-time data.*

   >>> cf.dt(2000, 2, 1) + cm                                                  
   cftime.datetime(2000-03-01 00:00:00)
   >>> cf.Data([1, 2, 3], 'days since 2000-02-01') + cm                       
   <CF Data(3): [2000-03-02 00:00:00, 2000-03-03 00:00:00, 2000-03-04 00:00:00] gregorian>

Date-time ranges that span the time duration can also be created:

.. code-block:: python
   :caption: *Create an interval starting from date-time; and an
             interval that contains a date-time, taking into account
             the offset.*

   >>> cm.interval(cf.dt(2000, 2, 1))                                         
   (cftime.DatetimeGregorian(2000-02-01 00:00:000),
    cftime.DatetimeGregorian(2000-03-01 00:00:000))
   >>> cm.bounds(cf.dt(2000, 2, 1))
   (cftime.DatetimeGregorian(2000-01-16 12:00:00),
    cftime.DatetimeGregorian(2000-02-16 12:00:00))

.. _Time duration constructors:

Time duration constructors
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

For convenience, `cf.TtimeDuration` instances can be created with the
following constructors:

===========  ===========================================================
Constructor  Description
===========  ===========================================================
`cf.Y`       A `cf.TimeDuration` object for a number of calendar years
`cf.M`       A `cf.TimeDuration` object for a number of calendar months
`cf.D`       A `cf.TimeDuration` object for a number of days
`cf.h`       A `cf.TimeDuration` object for a number of hours
`cf.m`       A `cf.TimeDuration` object for a number of minutes
`cf.s`       A `cf.TimeDuration` object for a number of seconds
===========  ===========================================================

.. code-block:: python
   :caption: *Some examples of 'cf.TimeDuration' objects returned by
             constructors.*

   >>> cf.D()                                                                    
   <CF TimeDuration: P1D (Y-M-D 00:00:00)>
   >>> cf.Y(10, month=12)                                                        
   <CF TimeDuration: P10Y (Y-12-01 00:00:00)>

   ----
  
.. _Domain:

**Domain**
----------

The :ref:`domain of the CF data model <CF-data-model>` is *not* a
construct, but is defined collectively by various other metadata
constructs included in the field construct. It is represented by the
`cf.Domain` class. The domain instance may be accessed with the
`~Field.domain` attribute, or `~Field.get_domain` method, of the field
construct.

.. code-block:: python
   :caption: *Get the domain, and inspect it.*

   >>> domain = t.domain
   >>> domain
   <CF Domain: {1, 1, 9, 10}>
   >>> print(domain)
   Dimension coords: atmosphere_hybrid_height_coordinate(1) = [1.5]
                   : grid_latitude(10) = [2.2, ..., -1.76] degrees
                   : grid_longitude(9) = [-4.7, ..., -1.18] degrees
                   : time(1) = [2019-01-01 00:00:00]
   Auxiliary coords: latitude(grid_latitude(10), grid_longitude(9)) = [[53.941, ..., 50.225]] degrees_N
                   : longitude(grid_longitude(9), grid_latitude(10)) = [[2.004, ..., 8.156]] degrees_E
                   : long_name=Grid latitude name(grid_latitude(10)) = [--, ..., 'kappa']
   Cell measures   : measure:area(grid_longitude(9), grid_latitude(10)) = [[2391.9657, ..., 2392.6009]] km2
   Coord references: grid_mapping_name:rotated_latitude_longitude
                   : standard_name:atmosphere_hybrid_height_coordinate
   Domain ancils   : ncvar%a(atmosphere_hybrid_height_coordinate(1)) = [10.0] m
                   : ncvar%b(atmosphere_hybrid_height_coordinate(1)) = [20.0]
                   : surface_altitude(grid_latitude(10), grid_longitude(9)) = [[0.0, ..., 270.0]] m
   >>> description = domain.dump(display=False)

Changes to domain instance are seen by the field construct, and vice
versa. This is because the domain instance is merely a "view" of the
relevant metadata constructs contained in the field construct.

.. The field construct also has a `~Field.domain` attribute that is an
   alias for the `~Field.get_domain` method, which makes it easier to
   access attributes and methods of the domain instance.

.. code-block:: python
   :caption: *Change a property of a metadata construct of the domain
             and show that this change appears in the same metadata
             data construct of the parent field, and vice versa.*

   >>> domain_latitude = t.domain.constructs('latitude').value()
   >>> field_latitude = t.constructs('latitude').value()
   >>> domain_latitude.set_property('test', 'set by domain')
   >>> print(field_latitude.get_property('test'))
   set by domain
   >>> field_latitude.set_property('test', 'set by field')
   >>> print(domain_latitude.get_property('test'))
   set by field
   >>> domain_latitude.del_property('test')
   'set by field'
   >>> field_latitude.has_property('test')
   False

All of the methods and attributes related to the domain are listed
:ref:`here <Field-Domain>`.

----

.. _Metadata-construct-types:
     
**Metadata construct types**
----------------------------

    
.. _Domain-axes:

Domain axes
^^^^^^^^^^^

A domain axis metadata construct specifies the number of points along
an independent axis of the field construct's domain and is stored in a
`cf.DomainAxis` instance. The size of the axis is retrieved with
the `~cf.DomainAxis.get_size` method of the domain axis construct.

.. code-block:: python
   :caption: *Get the size of a domain axis construct.*

   >>> print(q.domain_axes)
   Constructs:
   {'domainaxis0': <CF DomainAxis: size(5)>,
    'domainaxis1': <CF DomainAxis: size(8)>,
    'domainaxis2': <CF DomainAxis: size(1)>}
   >>> d = q.domain_axes.get('domainaxis1')
   >>> d
   <CF DomainAxis: size(8)>
   >>> d.get_size()
   8

.. _Coordinates:
		
Coordinates
^^^^^^^^^^^

There are two types of coordinate construct, dimension and auxiliary
coordinate constructs, which can be retrieved together with the
`~cf.Field.coordinates` method of the field construct, as well as
individually with the `~cf.Field.auxiliary_coordinates` and
`~cf.Field.dimension_coordinates` methods.

.. code-block:: python
   :caption: *Retrieve both types of coordinate constructs.*
      
   >>> print(t.coordinates)
   Constructs:
   {'auxiliarycoordinate0': <CF AuxiliaryCoordinate: latitude(10, 9) degrees_N>,
    'auxiliarycoordinate1': <CF AuxiliaryCoordinate: longitude(9, 10) degrees_E>,
    'auxiliarycoordinate2': <CF AuxiliaryCoordinate: long_name=Grid latitude name(10) >,
    'dimensioncoordinate0': <CF DimensionCoordinate: atmosphere_hybrid_height_coordinate(1) >,
    'dimensioncoordinate1': <CF DimensionCoordinate: grid_latitude(10) degrees>,
    'dimensioncoordinate2': <CF DimensionCoordinate: grid_longitude(9) degrees>,
    'dimensioncoordinate3': <CF DimensionCoordinate: time(1) days since 2018-12-01 >}

.. _Bounds:

Bounds
~~~~~~

A coordinate construct may contain an array of cell bounds that
provides the extent of each cell by defining the locations of the cell
vertices. This is in addition to the main data array that contains a
grid point location for each cell. The cell bounds are stored in a
`cf.Bounds` class instance that is accessed with the
`~Coordinate.bounds` attribute, or `~Coordinate.get_bounds` method, of
the coordinate construct.

A `cf.Bounds` instance shares the :ref:`the same API as the field
construct <Data>` for accessing its data.

.. code-block:: python
   :caption: *Get the Bounds instance of a coordinate construct and
             inspect its data.*
      
   >>> lon = t.constructs('grid_longitude').value()
   >>> bounds = lon.bounds
   >>> bounds
   <CF Bounds: grid_longitude(9, 2) degrees>
   >>> bounds.data
   <CF Data(9, 2): [[-4.92, ..., -0.96]] degrees>
   >>> print(bounds.array)
   [[-4.92 -4.48]
    [-4.48 -4.04]
    [-4.04 -3.6 ]
    [-3.6  -3.16]
    [-3.16 -2.72]
    [-2.72 -2.28]
    [-2.28 -1.84]
    [-1.84 -1.4 ]
    [-1.4  -0.96]]

The `cf.Bounds` instance inherits the descriptive properties from its
parent coordinate construct, but it may also have its own properties
(although setting these is not recommended).

.. TODO2 CF-1.8 change on bounds properties all good if there are no coordinates

.. code-block:: python
   :caption: *Inspect the inherited and bespoke properties of a Bounds
             instance.*
      
   >>> bounds.inherited_properties()
   {'standard_name': 'grid_longitude',
    'units': 'degrees'}  
   >>> bounds.properties()
   {'units': 'degrees'}

.. _Geometry-cells:

Geometry cells
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

For many geospatial applications, cell bounds can not be represented
by a simple line or polygon, and different cells may have different
numbers of nodes describing their bounds. For example, if each cell
describes the areal extent of a watershed, then it is likely that some
watersheds will require more nodes than others. Such cells are called
`geometries`_.

If a coordinate construct represents geometries then it will have a
"geometry" attribute (not a :ref:`CF property
<Metadata-construct-properties>`) with one of the values ``'point'``,
'``line'`` or ``'polygon'``.

This is illustrated with the file ``geometry.nc`` (found in the
:ref:`sample datasets <Sample-datasets>`):

.. code-block:: python
   :caption: *Read and inspect a dataset containing geometry cell
             bounds.*

   >>> f = cf.read('geometry.nc')[0]
   >>> print(f)
   Field: preciptitation_amount (ncvar%pr)
   ---------------------------------------
   Data            : preciptitation_amount(cf_role=timeseries_id(2), time(4))
   Dimension coords: time(4) = [2000-01-02 00:00:00, ..., 2000-01-05 00:00:00]
   Auxiliary coords: latitude(cf_role=timeseries_id(2)) = [25.0, 7.0] degrees_north
                   : longitude(cf_role=timeseries_id(2)) = [10.0, 40.0] degrees_east
                   : altitude(cf_role=timeseries_id(2)) = [5000.0, 20.0] m
                   : cf_role=timeseries_id(cf_role=timeseries_id(2)) = [b'x1', b'y2']
   Coord references: grid_mapping_name:latitude_longitude
   >>> lon = f.auxiliary_coordinate('X')
   >>> lon.dump()                     
   Auxiliary coordinate: longitude
      standard_name = 'longitude'
      units = 'degrees_east'
      Data(2) = [10.0, 40.0] degrees_east
      Geometry: polygon
      Bounds:axis = 'X'
      Bounds:standard_name = 'longitude'
      Bounds:units = 'degrees_east'
      Bounds:Data(2, 3, 4) = [[[20.0, ..., --]]] degrees_east
      Interior Ring:Data(2, 3) = [[0, ..., --]]
   >>> lon.get_geometry()
   'polygon'

Bounds for geometry cells are also stored in a `Bounds` instance, but
one that always has *two* extra trailing dimensions (rather than
one). The fist trailing dimension indexes the distinct parts of a
geometry, and the second indexes the nodes of each part. When a part
has fewer nodes than another, its nodes dimension is padded with
missing data.


.. code-block:: python
   :caption: *Inspect the geometry nodes.*
 
   >>> print(lon.bounds.data.array)
   [[20.0 10.0  0.0   --]
    [ 5.0 10.0 15.0 10.0]
    [20.0 10.0  0.0   --]]

   [[50.0 40.0 30.0   --]
    [  --   --   --   --]
    [  --   --   --   --]]]

If a cell is composed of multiple polygon parts, an individual polygon
may define an "interior ring", i.e. a region that is to be omitted
from, as opposed to included in, the cell extent. Such cells also have
an interior ring array that spans the same domain axes as the
coordinate cells, with the addition of one extra dimension that
indexes the parts for each cell. This array records whether each
polygon is to be included or excluded from the cell, with values of
``1`` or ``0`` respectively.

.. code-block:: python
   :caption: *Inspect the interior ring information.*
 
   >>> print(lon.get_interior_ring().data.array)
   [[0  1  0]
    [0 -- --]]

Note it is preferable to access the data type, number of dimensions,
dimension sizes and number of elements of the coordinate construct via
the construct's attributes, rather than the attributes of the
`cf.Data` instance that provides representative values for each
cell. This is because the representative cell values for geometries
are optional, and if they are missing then the construct attributes
are able to infer these attributes from the bounds.
  
When a field construct containing geometries is written to disk, a
CF-netCDF geometry container variable is automatically created, and
the cells encoded with the :ref:`compression <Compression>` techniques
defined in the CF conventions.

.. _Domain-ancillaries:
		
Domain ancillaries
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

A domain ancillary construct provides information which is needed for
computing the location of cells in an alternative :ref:`coordinate
system <Coordinate-systems>`. If a domain ancillary construct provides
extra coordinates then it may contain cell bounds in addition to its
main data array.

.. code-block:: python
   :caption: *Get the data and bounds data of a domain ancillary
             construct.*
      
   >>> a = t.constructs.get('domainancillary0')
   >>> print(a.array)
   [10.]
   >>> bounds = a.bounds
   >>> bounds
   <Bounds: ncvar%a_bounds(1, 2) m>
   >>> print(bounds.array)
   [[  5.  15.]]

.. _Coordinate-systems:

Coordinate systems
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

A field construct may contain various coordinate systems. Each
coordinate system is either defined by a coordinate reference
construct that relates dimension coordinate, auxiliary coordinate and
domain ancillary constructs (as is the case for the field construct
``t``), or is inferred from dimension and auxiliary coordinate
constructs alone (as is the case for the field construct ``q``).

A coordinate reference construct contains

* references (by construct keys) to the dimension and auxiliary
  coordinate constructs to which it applies, accessed with the
  `~CoordinateReference.coordinates` method of the coordinate
  reference construct;

..

* the zeroes of the dimension and auxiliary coordinate constructs
  which define the coordinate system, stored in a `cf.Datum` instance,
  which is accessed with the `~CoordinateReference.datum` attribute,
  or `~CoordinateReference.get_datum` method, of the coordinate
  reference construct; and

..

* a formula for converting coordinate values taken from the dimension
  or auxiliary coordinate constructs to a different coordinate system,
  stored in a `cf.CoordinateConversion` class instance, which is
  accessed with the `~CoordinateReference.coordinate_conversion`
  attribute, or `~CoordinateReference.get_coordinate_conversion`
  method, of the coordinate reference construct.

.. code-block:: python
   :caption: *Select the vertical coordinate system construct and
             inspect its coordinate constructs.*
     
   >>> crs = t.constructs('standard_name:atmosphere_hybrid_height_coordinate').value()
   >>> crs
   <CF CoordinateReference: standard_name:atmosphere_hybrid_height_coordinate>
   >>> crs.dump()
   Coordinate Reference: atmosphere_hybrid_height_coordinate
       Coordinate conversion:computed_standard_name = altitude
       Coordinate conversion:standard_name = atmosphere_hybrid_height_coordinate
       Coordinate conversion:a = domainancillary0
       Coordinate conversion:b = domainancillary1
       Coordinate conversion:orog = domainancillary2
       Datum:earth_radius = 6371007
       Coordinate: dimensioncoordinate0
   >>> crs.coordinates()
   {'dimensioncoordinate0'}

.. code-block:: python
   :caption: *Get the datum and inspect its parameters.*
	     
   >>> crs.datum
   <CF Datum: Parameters: earth_radius>
   >>> crs.datum.parameters()
   {'earth_radius': 6371007}


.. code-block:: python
   :caption: *Get the coordinate conversion and inspect its parameters
             and referenced domain ancillary constructs.*
	     
   >>> crs.coordinate_conversion
   <CF CoordinateConversion: Parameters: computed_standard_name, standard_name; Ancillaries: a, b, orog>
   >>> crs.coordinate_conversion.parameters()
   {'computed_standard_name': 'altitude',
    'standard_name': 'atmosphere_hybrid_height_coordinate'}
   >>> crs.coordinate_conversion.domain_ancillaries()
   {'a': 'domainancillary0',
    'b': 'domainancillary1',
    'orog': 'domainancillary2'}    

.. _Cell-methods:
   
Cell methods
^^^^^^^^^^^^

A cell method construct describes how the data represent the variation
of the physical quantity within the cells of the domain and is stored
in a `cf.CellMethod` instance. A field constructs allows multiple
cell method constructs to be recorded.

.. code-block:: python
   :caption: *Inspect the cell methods. The description follows the CF
             conventions for cell_method attribute strings, apart from
             the use of construct keys instead of netCDF variable
             names for cell method axes identification.*
	     
   >>> print(t.cell_methods)
   Constructs:
   {'cellmethod0': <CF CellMethod: domainaxis1: domainaxis2: mean where land (interval: 0.1 degrees)>,
    'cellmethod1': <CF CellMethod: domainaxis3: maximum>}

The application of cell methods is not commutative (e.g. a mean of
variances is generally not the same as a variance of means), so a
`cf.Constructs` instance has an `~Constructs.ordered` method to retrieve
the cell method constructs in the same order that they were were added
to the field construct during :ref:`field construct creation
<Field-creation>`.

.. code-block:: python
   :caption: *Retrieve the cell method constructs in the same order
             that they were applied.*
	     
   >>> t.cell_methods.ordered()
   OrderedDict([('cellmethod0', <CF CellMethod: domainaxis1: domainaxis2: mean where land (interval: 0.1 degrees)>),
                ('cellmethod1', <CF CellMethod: domainaxis3: maximum>)])

The axes to which the method applies, the method itself, and any
qualifying properties are accessed with the
`~cf.CellMethod.get_axes`, `~cf.CellMethod.get_method`, ,
`~cf.CellMethod.get_qualifier` and `~cf.CellMethod.qualifiers`
methods of the cell method construct.

.. code-block:: python
   :caption: *Get the domain axes constructs to which the cell method
             construct applies, and the method and other properties.*
     
   >>> cm = t.constructs('method:mean').value()
   >>> cm
   <CF CellMethod: domainaxis1: domainaxis2: mean where land (interval: 0.1 degrees)>
   >>> cm.get_axes()
   ('domainaxis1', 'domainaxis2')
   >>> cm.get_method()
   'mean'
   >>> cm.qualifiers()
   {'where': 'land', 'interval': [<CF Data(): 0.1 degrees>]}
   >>> cm.get_qualifier('where')
   'land'

.. _Field-ancillaries:
		
Field ancillaries
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

A field ancillary construct provides metadata which are distributed
over the same domain as the field construct itself. For example, if a
field construct holds a data retrieved from a satellite instrument, a
field ancillary construct might provide the uncertainty estimates for
those retrievals (varying over the same spatiotemporal domain).

.. code-block:: python
   :caption: *Get the properties and data of a field ancillary
             construct.*

   >>> a = t.get_construct('fieldancillary0')
   >>> a
   <CF FieldAncillary: air_temperature standard_error(10, 9) K>
   >>> a.properties()
   {'standard_name': 'air_temperature standard_error',
    'units': 'K'}
   >>> a.data
   <CF Data(10, 9): [[0.76, ..., 0.32]] K>

----

.. _Cyclic-domain-axes:

**Cyclic domain axes**
----------------------

A domain axis is cyclic if cells at both of its ends are actually
geographically adjacent. For example, a longitude cell spanning 359 to
360 degrees east is adjacent to the cell spanning 0 to 1 degrees east.

When a dimension coordinate construct is set on a field construct, the
cyclicity of its dimension is automatically determined, using the
`~Field.autocyclic` method of the field construct, provided the field
construct has sufficient coordinate metadata for it to be inferred.

To find out whether a dimension is cyclic use the `~Field.iscyclic`
method of the field construct, or to manually set its cyclicity use
the `~Field.cyclic` method.

Cyclicity is used by subspacing and mathematical operations to "wrap"
cyclic dimensions to give appropriate results.

Rolling a cyclic axis
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The field construct may be "rolled" along a cyclic axis with the
`~cf.Field.roll` method of the field construct. This means that the
data along that axis are shifted so that a given number of elements from
one edge of the dimension are removed and re-introduced at the other edge.
All metadata constructs whose data spans the cyclic axis are also rolled.

.. code-block:: python
   :caption: *Roll the data along the 'X' axis one element to the
             right, and also three elements to the left.*

   >>> print(q.array[0])
   [0.007 0.034 0.003 0.014 0.018 0.037 0.024 0.029]
   >>> print(q.roll('X', shift=1).array[0])
   [0.029 0.007 0.034 0.003 0.014 0.018 0.037 0.024]
   >>> qr = q.roll('X', shift=-3)
   >>> print(qr.array[0])
   [0.014 0.018 0.037 0.024 0.029 0.007 0.034 0.003]

.. code-block:: python
   :caption: *Inspect the 'X' dimension coordinates of the original
             and rolled field constructs, showing that monotonicity
             has been preserved.*
   
   >>> print(q.dimension_coordinate('X').array)
   [ 22.5  67.5 112.5 157.5 202.5 247.5 292.5 337.5]
   >>> print(qr.dimension_coordinate('X').array)
   [-202.5 -157.5 -112.5  -67.5  -22.5   22.5   67.5  112.5]


Anchoring a cyclic axis
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The field construct may be rolled by specifying a dimension coordinate
value that should be contained in the first element of the data for
the corresponding axis, by specifying the coordinate value via the
`~cf.Field.anchor` method if the field construct.

.. code-block:: python
   :caption: *Roll the data along the 'X' axis so that the first
             element of the axis contains -150 degrees east, and
             also -750 degrees east.*

   >>> print(q.anchor('X', -150))                         
   Field: specific_humidity (ncvar%q)
   ----------------------------------
   Data            : specific_humidity(latitude(5), longitude(8)) 1
   Cell methods    : area: mean
   Dimension coords: latitude(5) = [-75.0, ..., 75.0] degrees_north
                   : longitude(8) = [-112.5, ..., 202.5] degrees_east
                   : time(1) = [2019-01-01 00:00:00]   
   >>> print(q.anchor('X', -750))
   Field: specific_humidity (ncvar%q)
   ----------------------------------
   Data            : specific_humidity(latitude(5), longitude(8)) 1
   Cell methods    : area: mean
   Dimension coords: latitude(5) = [-75.0, ..., 75.0] degrees_north
                   : longitude(8) = [-742.5, ..., -427.5] degrees_east
                   : time(1) = [2019-01-01 00:00:00]

----

.. _Subspacing-by-metadata:

**Subspacing by metadata**
--------------------------

Creation of a new field construct which spans a subspace of the domain
of an existing field construct is achieved either by indexing the
field construct directly (see :ref:`Subspacing-by-index`) or by
identifying indices based on the metadata constructs (as described in
this section). The subspacing operation, in either case, also
subspaces any metadata constructs of the field construct
(e.g. coordinate metadata constructs) which span any of the domain
axis constructs that are affected. The new field construct is created
with the same properties as the original field construct.

Subspacing by metadata uses the `~Field.subspace` method of the field
construct to select metadata constructs and specify conditions on
their data. Indices for subspacing are then automatically inferred
from where the conditions are met.

Metadata constructs and the conditions on their data are defined by
keyword parameters to the `~Field.subspace` method. A keyword name is
:ref:`an identity <Metadata-construct-properties>` of a metadata
construct, and the keyword value provides a condition for inferring
indices that apply to the dimension (or dimensions) spanned by the
metadata construct's data. Indices are created that select every
location for which the metadata construct's data satisfies the
condition.

.. code-block:: python
   :caption: *Create a new field construct whose 'X' coordinate spans
              only 112.5 degrees east, with the other domain axes
              remaining unchanged.*
	     
   >>> print(q)
   Field: specific_humidity (ncvar%q)
   ----------------------------------
   Data            : specific_humidity(latitude(5), longitude(8)) 1
   Cell methods    : area: mean
   Dimension coords: latitude(5) = [-75.0, ..., 75.0] degrees_north
                   : longitude(8) = [22.5, ..., 337.5] degrees_east
                   : time(1) = [2019-01-01T00:00:00Z]
   >>> print(q.construct('X').array)
   [ 22.5  67.5 112.5 157.5 202.5 247.5 292.5 337.5]
   >>> q2 = q.subspace(X=112.5)
   >>> print(q2)
   Field: specific_humidity (ncvar%q)
   ----------------------------------
   Data            : specific_humidity(latitude(5), longitude(1)) 1
   Cell methods    : area: mean
   Dimension coords: latitude(5) = [-75.0, ..., 75.0] degrees_north
                   : longitude(1) = [112.5] degrees_east
                   : time(1) = [2019-01-01T00:00:00Z]

Any domain axes that have not been identified remain
unchanged.

Multiple domain axes may be subspaced simultaneously, and it doesn't
matter which order they are specified in the `~Field.subspace` call.
					      
.. code-block:: python
   :caption: *Create a new field construct whose domain spans only
             112.5 degrees east and has latitude greater than -60
             degrees north, with the other domain axes remaining
             unchanged.*
  	     
   >>> print(q.construct('latitude').array)
   [-75. -45.   0.  45.  75.]
   >>> print(q.subspace(X=112.5, latitude=cf.gt(-60)))
   Field: specific_humidity (ncvar%q)
   ----------------------------------
   Data            : specific_humidity(latitude(4), longitude(1)) 1
   Cell methods    : area: mean
   Dimension coords: latitude(4) = [-45.0, ..., 75.0] degrees_north
                   : longitude(1) = [112.5] degrees_east
                   : time(1) = [2019-01-01T00:00:00Z]

In the above example, ``cf.gt(-60)`` returns a `cf.Query` instance
which defines a condition ("greater than -60") that can be applied to
the selected construct's data. See :ref:`Encapsulating-conditions` for
details.

.. code-block:: python
   :caption: *Create a new field construct whose domain spans only 45
             degrees south and latitudes greater than 20 degrees
             north.*
	  
   >>> c = cf.eq(-45) | cf.ge(20)
   >>> c
   <CF Query: [(eq -45) | (ge 20)]>
   >>> print(q.subspace(latitude=c))
   Field: specific_humidity (ncvar%q)
   ----------------------------------
   Data            : specific_humidity(latitude(3), longitude(8)) 1
   Cell methods    : area: mean
   Dimension coords: latitude(3) = [-45.0, 45.0, 75.0] degrees_north
                   : longitude(8) = [22.5, ..., 337.5] degrees_east
                   : time(1) = [2019-01-01T00:00:00Z]

In the above example, two `cf.Query` instances are combined into a new
`cf.Query` instance via the Python bitwise "or" operator (`|`). See
:ref:`Encapsulating-conditions` for details.

Subspace criteria may be provided for size 1 domain axes that are not
spanned by the field construct's data.

Explicit indices may also be assigned to a domain axis identified by a
metadata construct, with either a Python `slice` object, or a sequence
of integers or Booleans.

.. code-block:: python
   :caption: *Create a new field construct whose domain spans the 2nd,
              3rd and 5th elements of the 'X' axis, and reverses the
              'Y' axis.*
	  
   >>> print(q.subspace(X=[1, 2, 4], Y=slice(None, None, -1)))
   Field: specific_humidity (ncvar%q)
   ----------------------------------
   Data            : specific_humidity(latitude(5), longitude(3)) 1
   Cell methods    : area: mean
   Dimension coords: latitude(5) = [75.0, ..., -75.0] degrees_north
                   : longitude(3) = [67.5, 112.5, 202.5] degrees_east
                   : time(1) = [2019-01-01T00:00:00Z]

For a dimension that is :ref:`cyclic <Cyclic-domain-axes>`, a subspace
defined by a slice or by a `cf.Query` instance is assumed to “wrap”
around the edges of the data.


.. code-block:: python
   :caption: *Create subspaces that wrap around a cyclic dimension.*
	  
   >>> print(q.subspace(X=cf.wi(-100, 200)))
   Field: specific_humidity (ncvar%q)
   ----------------------------------
   Data            : specific_humidity(latitude(5), longitude(6)) 1
   Cell methods    : area: mean
   Dimension coords: latitude(5) = [-75.0, ..., 75.0] degrees_north
                   : longitude(6) = [-67.5, ..., 157.5] degrees_east
                   : time(1) = [2019-01-01 00:00:00]
   >>> print (q.subspace(X=slice(-2, 4)))
   Field: specific_humidity (ncvar%q)
   ----------------------------------
   Data            : specific_humidity(latitude(5), longitude(6)) 1
   Cell methods    : area: mean
   Dimension coords: latitude(5) = [-75.0, ..., 75.0] degrees_north
                   : longitude(6) = [-67.5, ..., 157.5] degrees_east
                   : time(1) = [2019-01-01 00:00:00]

	
Subspaces in time
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Subspaces based on time dimensions may be defined with as
:ref:`elapsed times since the reference date <Time>`, or with
date-time objects.

.. code-block:: python
   :caption: *TODO*

   >>> a = cf.read('timeseries.nc')[0]
   >>> print (a)     
   Field: air_potential_temperature (ncvar%air_potential_temperature)
   ------------------------------------------------------------------
   Data            : air_potential_temperature(time(120), latitude(5), longitude(8)) K
   Cell methods    : area: mean
   Dimension coords: time(120) = [1959-12-16 12:00:00, ..., 1969-11-16 00:00:00]
                   : latitude(5) = [-75.0, ..., 75.0] degrees_north
                   : longitude(8) = [22.5, ..., 337.5] degrees_east
                   : air_pressure(1) = [850.0] hPa
   >>> print(a.coordinate('T').array[0:9])
   [349.5 380.5 410.5 440.5 471.  501.5 532.  562.5 593.5]
   >>> print(a.coordinate('T').datetime_array[0:9])    
   [cftime.DatetimeGregorian(1959-12-16 12:00:00)
    cftime.DatetimeGregorian(1960-01-16 12:00:00)
    cftime.DatetimeGregorian(1960-02-15 12:00:00)
    cftime.DatetimeGregorian(1960-03-16 12:00:00)
    cftime.DatetimeGregorian(1960-04-16 00:00:00)
    cftime.DatetimeGregorian(1960-05-16 12:00:00)
    cftime.DatetimeGregorian(1960-06-16 00:00:00)
    cftime.DatetimeGregorian(1960-07-16 12:00:00)
    cftime.DatetimeGregorian(1960-08-16 12:00:00)]
   >>> print(a.subspace(T=410.5))
   Field: air_potential_temperature (ncvar%air_potential_temperature)
   ------------------------------------------------------------------
   Data            : air_potential_temperature(time(1), latitude(5), longitude(8)) K
   Cell methods    : area: mean
   Dimension coords: time(1) = [1960-02-15 12:00:00]
                   : latitude(5) = [-75.0, ..., 75.0] degrees_north
                   : longitude(8) = [22.5, ..., 337.5] degrees_east
                   : air_pressure(1) = [850.0] hPa
   >>> print(a.subspace(T=cf.dt('1960-04-16')))
   Field: air_potential_temperature (ncvar%air_potential_temperature)
   ------------------------------------------------------------------
   Data            : air_potential_temperature(time(1), latitude(5), longitude(8)) K
   Cell methods    : area: mean
   Dimension coords: time(1) = [1960-04-16 00:00:00]
                   : latitude(5) = [-75.0, ..., 75.0] degrees_north
                   : longitude(8) = [22.5, ..., 337.5] degrees_east
                   : air_pressure(1) = [850.0] hPa
   >>> print(a.subspace(T=cf.wi(cf.dt('1962-11-01'), cf.dt('1967-03-17 07:30'))))
   Field: air_potential_temperature (ncvar%air_potential_temperature)
   ------------------------------------------------------------------
   Data            : air_potential_temperature(time(53), latitude(5), longitude(8)) K
   Cell methods    : area: mean
   Dimension coords: time(53) = [1962-11-16 00:00:00, ..., 1967-03-16 12:00:00]
                   : latitude(5) = [-75.0, ..., 75.0] degrees_north
                   : longitude(8) = [22.5, ..., 337.5] degrees_east
                   : air_pressure(1) = [850.0] hPa


.. _Subspace-mode:

Subspace mode
^^^^^^^^^^^^^

There are three modes of operation, each of which provides a different
type of subspace:


* **compress mode**. This is the default mode. Unselected locations
  are removed to create the returned subspace:

  .. code-block:: python
     :caption: *Create TODO*

     >>> print(q.array)
     [[0.007 0.034 0.003 0.014 0.018 0.037 0.024 0.029]
      [0.023 0.036 0.045 0.062 0.046 0.073 0.006 0.066]
      [0.11  0.131 0.124 0.146 0.087 0.103 0.057 0.011]
      [0.029 0.059 0.039 0.07  0.058 0.072 0.009 0.017]
      [0.006 0.036 0.019 0.035 0.018 0.037 0.034 0.013]]
     >>> q2 = q.subspace('compress', X=[1, 2, 4, 6])
     >>> print(q2)
     Field: specific_humidity (ncvar%q)
     ----------------------------------
     Data            : specific_humidity(latitude(5), longitude(4)) 1
     Cell methods    : area: mean
     Dimension coords: latitude(5) = [-75.0, ..., 75.0] degrees_north
                     : longitude(4) = [67.5, ..., 292.5] degrees_east
                     : time(1) = [2019-01-01T00:00:00Z]
     
     >>> print(q2.array)
     [[0.034 0.003 0.018 0.024]
      [0.036 0.045 0.046 0.006]
      [0.131 0.124 0.087 0.057]
      [0.059 0.039 0.058 0.009]
      [0.036 0.019 0.018 0.034]]

  Note that if a multi-dimensional metadata construct is being used to
  define the indices then some missing data may still be inserted at
  unselected locations.      

..

* **envelope mode**. The returned subspace is the smallest that
  contains all of the selected indices. Missing data is inserted at
  unselected locations within the envelope.

  .. code-block:: python
     :caption: *Create TODO*

     >>> q2 = q.subspace('envelope', X=[1, 2, 4, 6])
     >>> print(q2)
     Field: specific_humidity (ncvar%q)
     ----------------------------------
     Data            : specific_humidity(latitude(5), longitude(6)) 1
     Cell methods    : area: mean
     Dimension coords: latitude(5) = [-75.0, ..., 75.0] degrees_north
                     : longitude(4) = [67.5, ..., 292.5] degrees_east
                     : time(1) = [2019-01-01T00:00:00Z]
     >>> print(q2.array)
     [[0.034 0.003 -- 0.018 -- 0.024]
      [0.036 0.045 -- 0.046 -- 0.006]
      [0.131 0.124 -- 0.087 -- 0.057]
      [0.059 0.039 -- 0.058 -- 0.009]
      [0.036 0.019 -- 0.018 -- 0.034]]
     
..

* **full mode**. The returned subspace has the same domain as the
  original field construct. Missing data is inserted at unselected
  locations.

  .. code-block:: python
     :caption: *Create TODO*

     >>> q2 = q.subspace('full', X=[1, 2, 4, 6])
     >>> print(q2)
     Field: specific_humidity (ncvar%q)
     ----------------------------------
     Data            : specific_humidity(latitude(5), longitude(8)) 1
     Cell methods    : area: mean
     Dimension coords: latitude(5) = [-75.0, ..., 75.0] degrees_north
                     : longitude(8) = [22.5, ..., 337.5] degrees_east
                     : time(1) = [2019-01-01T00:00:00Z]
     
     >>> print(q2.array)
     [[-- 0.034 0.003 -- 0.018 -- 0.024 --]
      [-- 0.036 0.045 -- 0.046 -- 0.006 --]
      [-- 0.131 0.124 -- 0.087 -- 0.057 --]
      [-- 0.059 0.039 -- 0.058 -- 0.009 --]
      [-- 0.036 0.019 -- 0.018 -- 0.034 --]]

The `~Field.where` method of the field construct also allows values
(including missing data) to be assigned to the data based on criteria
applying to the field construct's data, its metadata constructs; or
inserted from another field construct. See
:ref:`Assignment-by-condition`.
      
.. _Multiple dimensions:

Multiple dimensions
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Conditions may also be applied to multi-dimensional metadata
constructs

.. code-block:: python
   :caption: *Create TODO*

   >>> print(t)
   Field: air_temperature (ncvar%ta)
   ---------------------------------
   Data            : air_temperature(atmosphere_hybrid_height_coordinate(1), grid_latitude(10), grid_longitude(9)) K
   Cell methods    : grid_latitude(10): grid_longitude(9): mean where land (interval: 0.1 degrees) time(1): maximum
   Field ancils    : air_temperature standard_error(grid_latitude(10), grid_longitude(9)) = [[0.81, ..., 0.78]] K
   Dimension coords: time(1) = [2019-01-01 00:00:00]
                   : atmosphere_hybrid_height_coordinate(1) = [1.5]
                   : grid_latitude(10) = [2.2, ..., -1.76] degrees
                   : grid_longitude(9) = [-4.7, ..., -1.18] degrees
   Auxiliary coords: latitude(grid_latitude(10), grid_longitude(9)) = [[53.941, ..., 50.225]] degrees_N
                   : longitude(grid_longitude(9), grid_latitude(10)) = [[2.004, ..., 8.156]] degrees_E
                   : long_name=Grid latitude name(grid_latitude(10)) = [--, ..., 'kappa']
   Cell measures   : measure:area(grid_longitude(9), grid_latitude(10)) = [[2391.9657, ..., 2392.6009]] km2
   Coord references: grid_mapping_name:rotated_latitude_longitude
                   : standard_name:atmosphere_hybrid_height_coordinate
   Domain ancils   : ncvar%a(atmosphere_hybrid_height_coordinate(1)) = [10.0] m
                   : ncvar%b(atmosphere_hybrid_height_coordinate(1)) = [20.0]
                   : surface_altitude(grid_latitude(10), grid_longitude(9)) = [[0.0, ..., 270.0]] m
   >>> print(t.construct('latitude').array)
   [[53.941 53.987 54.029 54.066 54.099 54.127 54.15  54.169 54.184]
    [53.504 53.55  53.591 53.627 53.66  53.687 53.711 53.729 53.744]
    [53.067 53.112 53.152 53.189 53.221 53.248 53.271 53.29  53.304]
    [52.629 52.674 52.714 52.75  52.782 52.809 52.832 52.85  52.864]
    [52.192 52.236 52.276 52.311 52.343 52.37  52.392 52.41  52.424]
    [51.754 51.798 51.837 51.873 51.904 51.93  51.953 51.971 51.984]
    [51.316 51.36  51.399 51.434 51.465 51.491 51.513 51.531 51.545]
    [50.879 50.922 50.96  50.995 51.025 51.052 51.074 51.091 51.105]
    [50.441 50.484 50.522 50.556 50.586 50.612 50.634 50.652 50.665]
    [50.003 50.045 50.083 50.117 50.147 50.173 50.194 50.212 50.225]]
   >>> t2 = t.subspace(latitude=cf.wi(51, 53))
   >>> print(t2.array)
   [[[261.7 260.6 270.8 260.3 265.6 279.4 276.9 267.6 260.6]
     [264.2 275.9 262.5 264.9 264.7 270.2 270.4 268.6 275.3]
     [263.9 263.8 272.1 263.7 272.2 264.2 260.0 263.5 270.2]
     [273.8 273.1 268.5 272.3 264.3 278.7 270.6 273.0 270.6]
     [   --    --    --    -- 261.2 275.3 271.2 260.8 268.9]]]

The "compress" mode is still the default mode, but because the indices
may not be acting along orthogonal dimensions, some missing data may
still need to be inserted into the field construct's data, as is the
case in this example.

.. _Assignment-by-metadata:

Assignment by metadata
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Data elements can be changed by assigning to elements selected by
indices of the data (see :ref:`Assignment-by-index`); by conditions
based on the data values of the field construct or one if its metadata
constructs (see :ref:`Assignment-by-condition`); or by identifying
indices based on arbitrary metadata constructs (as described in this
section).
     
Assignment by metadata makes use of the `~Field.indices` method of the
field construct to select metadata constructs and specify conditions
on their data. Indices for subspacing are then automatically inferred
from where the conditions are met. The tuple of indices returned by
the `~Field.indices` may the be used in normal :ref:`assignment by
index <Assignment-by-index>`.

The `~Field.indices` method takes exactly the same arguments as the
`~Field.subspace` method of the field construct. See
:ref:`Subspacing-by-metadata` for details.

.. code-block:: python
   :caption: *Create TODO*

   >>> q, t = cf.read('file.nc')
   >>> print(t)
   Field: air_temperature (ncvar%ta)
   ---------------------------------
   Data            : air_temperature(atmosphere_hybrid_height_coordinate(1), grid_latitude(10), grid_longitude(9)) K
   Cell methods    : grid_latitude(10): grid_longitude(9): mean where land (interval: 0.1 degrees) time(1): maximum
   Field ancils    : air_temperature standard_error(grid_latitude(10), grid_longitude(9)) = [[0.76, ..., 0.32]] K
   Dimension coords: atmosphere_hybrid_height_coordinate(1) = [1.5]
                   : grid_latitude(10) = [2.2, ..., -1.76] degrees
                   : grid_longitude(9) = [-4.7, ..., -1.18] degrees
                   : time(1) = [2019-01-01 00:00:00]
   Auxiliary coords: latitude(grid_latitude(10), grid_longitude(9)) = [[53.941, ..., 50.225]] degrees_N
                   : longitude(grid_longitude(9), grid_latitude(10)) = [[2.004, ..., 8.156]] degrees_E
                   : long_name=Grid latitude name(grid_latitude(10)) = [--, ..., b'kappa']
   Cell measures   : measure:area(grid_longitude(9), grid_latitude(10)) = [[2391.9657, ..., 2392.6009]] km2
   Coord references: grid_mapping_name:rotated_latitude_longitude
                   : standard_name:atmosphere_hybrid_height_coordinate
   Domain ancils   : ncvar%a(atmosphere_hybrid_height_coordinate(1)) = [10.0] m
                   : ncvar%b(atmosphere_hybrid_height_coordinate(1)) = [20.0]
                   : surface_altitude(grid_latitude(10), grid_longitude(9)) = [[0.0, ..., 270.0]] m
   >>> indices = t.indices(grid_longitude=cf.wi(-4, -2))
   >>> indices           
   (slice(0, 1, 1), slice(0, 10, 1), slice(2, 7, 1))
   >>> t[indices] = -11
   >>> print(t.array)
   [[[262.8 270.5 -11.  -11.  -11.  -11.  -11.  278.9 269.2]
     [272.7 268.4 -11.  -11.  -11.  -11.  -11.  265.7 279.5]
     [269.7 279.1 -11.  -11.  -11.  -11.  -11.  272.5 263.7]
     [261.7 260.6 -11.  -11.  -11.  -11.  -11.  267.6 260.6]
     [264.2 275.9 -11.  -11.  -11.  -11.  -11.  268.6 275.3]
     [263.9 263.8 -11.  -11.  -11.  -11.  -11.  263.5 270.2]
     [273.8 273.1 -11.  -11.  -11.  -11.  -11.  273.  270.6]
     [267.9 273.5 -11.  -11.  -11.  -11.  -11.  260.8 268.9]
     [270.9 278.7 -11.  -11.  -11.  -11.  -11.  278.5 266.4]
     [276.4 264.2 -11.  -11.  -11.  -11.  -11.  273.4 269.7]]]
   >>> t[t.indices(latitude=cf.wi(51, 53))] = -99
   >>> print(t.array)
   [[[262.8 270.5 -11.  -11.  -11.  -11.  -11.  278.9 269.2]
     [272.7 268.4 -11.  -11.  -11.  -11.  -11.  265.7 279.5]
     [269.7 279.1 -11.  -11.  -11.  -11.  -11.  272.5 263.7]
     [-99.  -99.  -99.  -99.  -99.  -99.  -99.  -99.  -99. ]
     [-99.  -99.  -99.  -99.  -99.  -99.  -99.  -99.  -99. ]
     [-99.  -99.  -99.  -99.  -99.  -99.  -99.  -99.  -99. ]
     [-99.  -99.  -99.  -99.  -99.  -99.  -99.  -99.  -99. ]
     [267.9 273.5 -11.  -11.  -99.  -99.  -99.  -99.  -99. ]
     [270.9 278.7 -11.  -11.  -11.  -11.  -11.  278.5 266.4]
     [276.4 264.2 -11.  -11.  -11.  -11.  -11.  273.4 269.7]]]
   
----

.. _Sorting-and-selecting-from-field-lists:

**Sorting and selecting from field lists**
------------------------------------------

A :ref:`field list <Field-lists>` may be sorted in-place using the
same syntax as a Python `list`. By default the field list is sorted by
the values of the field constructs identities, but any sorting
criteria are possible.

.. code-block:: python
   :caption: *Sort a field list by the field construct identities, and
             by field construct units.*

   >>> fl = cf.read('file.nc')
   >>> fl
   [<CF Field: specific_humidity(latitude(5), longitude(8)) 1>,
    <CF Field: air_temperature(atmosphere_hybrid_height_coordinate(1), grid_latitude(10), grid_longitude(9)) K>]   
   >>> fl.sort()
   >>> fl
   [<CF Field: air_temperature(atmosphere_hybrid_height_coordinate(1), grid_latitude(10), grid_longitude(9)) K>,
    <CF Field: specific_humidity(latitude(5), longitude(8)) 1>]   
   >>> fl.sort(key=lambda f: f.units)
   >>> fl
   [<CF Field: specific_humidity(latitude(5), longitude(8)) 1>,
    <CF Field: air_temperature(atmosphere_hybrid_height_coordinate(1), grid_latitude(10), grid_longitude(9)) K>]

A field list has methods for selecting field constructs that meet
various criteria:

================================  ==========================================================================  
Method                            Filter criteria                                                              
================================  ==========================================================================  
`~FieldList.select_by_identity`   Field construct identity
`~FieldList.select_by_property`   Property values                                     
`~FieldList.select_by_units`      Units values.
`~FieldList.select_by_rank`       The total number of domain axis constructs in the domain
`~FieldList.select_by_naxes`      The number of domain axis constructs spanned by the data
`~FieldList.select_by_construct`  Existence and values of metadata constructs
`~FieldList.select_by_ncvar`      NetCDF variable name (see the :ref:`netCDF interface <NetCDF-interface>`)
================================  ==========================================================================  

Each of these methods returns a new (possibly empty) field list that
contains the selected field constructs.

.. code-block:: python
   :caption: *Get field constructs by their identity.*

   >>> fl = cf.read('*.nc')
   >>> fl
   [<CF Field: specific_humidity(cf_role=timeseries_id(4), ncdim%timeseries(9))>,
    <CF Field: eastward_wind(latitude(10), longitude(9)) m s-1>,
    <CF Field: cell_area(ncdim%longitude(9), ncdim%latitude(10)) m2>,
    <CF Field: specific_humidity(latitude(5), longitude(8)) 1>,
    <CF Field: air_temperature(atmosphere_hybrid_height_coordinate(1), grid_latitude(10), grid_longitude(9)) K>,
    <CF Field: air_temperature(time(2), latitude(73), longitude(96)) K>,
    <CF Field: air_potential_temperature(time(120), latitude(5), longitude(8)) K>,
    <CF Field: precipitation_flux(time(2), latitude(4), longitude(5)) kg m2 s-1>,
    <CF Field: precipitation_flux(time(1), latitude(64), longitude(128)) kg m-2 day-1>]
   >>> fl.select_by_identity('precipitation_flux')
   [<CF Field: precipitation_flux(time(2), latitude(4), longitude(5)) kg m2 s-1>,
    <CF Field: precipitation_flux(time(1), latitude(64), longitude(128)) kg m-2 day-1>]
   >>> import re
   >>> fl.select_by_identity(re.compile('.*potential.*'))
   [<CF Field: air_potential_temperature(time(120), latitude(5), longitude(8)) K>]
   >>> fl.select_by_identity('relative_humidity')
   []

As a convenience, selection by field construct identity is also
possible by providing identities to a call of a field list itself, or
to its `~FieldList.select` method.

.. code-block:: python
   :caption: *Get field constructs by their identity by calling the
             instance directly, or with the 'select' method.*

   >>> fl('air_temperature')
   [<CF Field: air_temperature(atmosphere_hybrid_height_coordinate(1), grid_latitude(10), grid_longitude(9)) K>,
    <CF Field: air_temperature(time(2), latitude(73), longitude(96)) K>]
   >>> fl.select('air_temperature')
   [<CF Field: air_temperature(atmosphere_hybrid_height_coordinate(1), grid_latitude(10), grid_longitude(9)) K>,
    <CF Field: air_temperature(time(2), latitude(73), longitude(96)) K>]


.. _Testing-criteria-on-a-field-construct:
    
Testing criteria on a field construct
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

A field construct has methods for ascertaining whether or not it meets
various criteria:

===========================  ==========================================================================  
Method                       Match criteria                                                              
===========================  ==========================================================================  
`~Field.match_by_identity`   Field construct identity
`~Field.match`               Field construct identity
`~Field.match_by_property`   Property values                                     
`~Field.match_by_units`      Units values.
`~Field.match_by_rank`       The total number of domain axis constructs in the domain
`~Field.match_by_naxes`      The number of domain axis constructs spanned by the data
`~Field.match_by_construct`  Existence and values of metadata constructs
`~Field.match_by_ncvar`      NetCDF variable name (see the :ref:`netCDF interface <NetCDF-interface>`)
===========================  ==========================================================================  

Each of these methods returns `True` if the field construct matches
the given criteria, or else `False`.

.. code-block:: python
   :caption: *Match a field construct to its properties and metadata.*

   >>> print(t)
   Field: air_temperature (ncvar%ta)
   ---------------------------------
   Data            : air_temperature(atmosphere_hybrid_height_coordinate(1), grid_latitude(10), grid_longitude(9)) K
   Cell methods    : grid_latitude(10): grid_longitude(9): mean where land (interval: 0.1 degrees) time(1): maximum
   Field ancils    : air_temperature standard_error(grid_latitude(10), grid_longitude(9)) = [[0.76, ..., 0.32]] K
   Dimension coords: atmosphere_hybrid_height_coordinate(1) = [1.5]
                   : grid_latitude(10) = [2.2, ..., -1.76] degrees
                   : grid_longitude(9) = [-4.7, ..., -1.18] degrees
                   : time(1) = [2019-01-01 00:00:00]
   Auxiliary coords: latitude(grid_latitude(10), grid_longitude(9)) = [[53.941, ..., 50.225]] degrees_N
                   : longitude(grid_longitude(9), grid_latitude(10)) = [[2.004, ..., 8.156]] degrees_E
                   : long_name=Grid latitude name(grid_latitude(10)) = [--, ..., 'kappa']
   Cell measures   : measure:area(grid_longitude(9), grid_latitude(10)) = [[2391.9657, ..., 2392.6009]] km2
   Coord references: grid_mapping_name:rotated_latitude_longitude
                   : standard_name:atmosphere_hybrid_height_coordinate
   Domain ancils   : ncvar%a(atmosphere_hybrid_height_coordinate(1)) = [10.0] m
                   : ncvar%b(atmosphere_hybrid_height_coordinate(1)) = [20.0]
                   : surface_altitude(grid_latitude(10), grid_longitude(9)) = [[0.0, ..., 270.0]] m      
   >>> t.match_by_identity('air_temperature')
   True
   >>> t.match_by_rank(4)
   True
   >>> t.match_by_units('degC', exact=False)
   True
   >>> t.match_by_construct(longitude=cf.wi(-10, 10))
   True

As a convenience, matching a field construct by identity is also
possible with the `~Field.match` method, which is as alias for
`~Field.match_by_identity`.

.. code-block:: python
   :caption: *Match a field construct to its identity*.

   >>> t.match('specific_humidity')
   False
   >>> t.match('specific_humidity', 'air_temperature')
   True


----
   
.. _Encapsulating-conditions:

**Encapsulating conditions**
----------------------------

A condition that may be applied to any construct (or, indeed, any
object) may be stored in a `cf.Query` object. A `cf.Query` object
encapsulates a condition, such as "strictly less than 3". When applied
to an object, via the `cf.Query` instance's `~Query.evaluate` method
or the Python equality (`==`) operator, the condition is evaluated in
the context of that object.

.. code-block:: python
   :caption: *TODO*

   >>> c = cf.Query('lt', 3)
   >>> c
   <CF Query: (lt 3)>
   >>> c.evaluate(2)
   True
   >>> c == 2
   True
   >>> c != 2
   False
   >>> c.evaluate(3)
   False
   >>> c == cf.Data([1, 2, 3])
   <CF Data(3): [True, True, False]>
   >>> print(c == numpy.array([1, 2, 3]))
   [ True  True False]

The following operators are supported when constructing `cf.Query`
instances:

=========  ===========================================================
Operator   Description                                              
=========  ===========================================================
``'lt'``   A "strictly less than" condition           
``'le'``   A "less than or equal" condition
``'gt'``   A "strictly greater than" condition        
``'ge'``   A "greater than or equal" condition 
``'eq'``   An "equal" condition                       
``'ne'``   A "not equal" condition                    
``'wi'``   A "within a range" condition               
``'wo'``   A "without a range" condition              
``'set'``  A "member of set" condition
=========  ===========================================================

Compound conditions
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Multiple conditions may be combined with the Python bitwise "and"
(`&`) and "or" (`|`) operators to form a new, compound `cf.Query`
object.

.. code-block:: python
   :caption: *TODO*

   >>> ge3 = cf.Query('ge', 3)
   >>> lt5 = cf.Query('lt', 5)
   >>> c = ge3 & lt5
   >>> c 
   <CF Query: [(ge 3) & (lt 5)]>
   >>> c == 2
   False
   >>> c != 2
   True
   >>> c = ge3 | lt5
   >>> c
   <CF Query: [(ge 3) | (lt 5)]>
   >>> c == 2
   True
   >>> c &= cf.Query('set', [1, 3, 5])
   >>> c
   <CF Query: [[(ge 3) | (lt 5)] & (set [1, 3, 5])]>
   >>> c == 2
   False
   >>> c == 3
   True

A condition can also be applied to an attribute (as well as attributes
of attributes) of an object.

.. code-block:: python
   :caption: *Define and apply a condition that is applied to the
             upper bounds of a coordinate construct's cells.*

   >>> upper_bounds_ge_minus4 = cf.Query('ge', -4, attr='upper_bounds')
   >>> X = t.dimension_coordinate('X')
   >>> X
   <CF DimensionCoordinate: grid_longitude(9) degrees>
   >>> print(X.bounds.array)
   [[-4.92 -4.48]
    [-4.48 -4.04]
    [-4.04 -3.6 ]
    [-3.6  -3.16]
    [-3.16 -2.72]
    [-2.72 -2.28]
    [-2.28 -1.84]
    [-1.84 -1.4 ]
    [-1.4  -0.96]]
   >>> print((upper_bounds_ge_minus4 == X).array)
   [False False  True  True  True  True  True  True  True]

Condition constructors
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

For convenience, many commonly used conditions can be created with 
`cf.Query` instance constructors.

.. code-block:: python
   :caption: *An example of a constructor (for a cell containing a
             value) and its equivalent construction from constructor
             cf.Query instances.*

   >>> cf.contains(4)
   <CF Query: [lower_bounds(le 4) & upper_bounds(ge 4)]>
   >>> cf.Query('lt', 4, attr='lower_bounds') &  cf.Query('ge', 4, attr='upper_bounds')
   <CF Query: [lower_bounds(lt 4) & upper_bounds(ge 4)]>

The following `cf.Query` constructors are available:

=============  ======================================================================
*General conditions*
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Constructor    Description
=============  ======================================================================
`cf.lt`        A `cf.Query` object for a "strictly less than" condition
`cf.le`        A `cf.Query` object for a "less than or equal" condition
`cf.gt`        A `cf.Query` object for a "strictly greater than" condition
`cf.ge`        A `cf.Query` object for a "strictly greater than or equal" condition
`cf.eq`        A `cf.Query` object for an "equal" condition
`cf.ne`        A `cf.Query` object for a "not equal" condition
`cf.wi`        A `cf.Query` object for a "within a range" condition
`cf.wo`        A `cf.Query` object for a "without a range" condition
`cf.set`       A `cf.Query` object for a "member of set" condition                
=============  ======================================================================

|

=============  ===================================================================================
*Date-time conditions*
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Constructor    Description
=============  ===================================================================================
`cf.year`      A `cf.Query` object for a "year" condition
`cf.month`     A `cf.Query` object for a "month of the year" condition
`cf.day`       A `cf.Query` object for a "day of the month" condition
`cf.hour`      A `cf.Query` object for a "hour of the day" condition
`cf.minute`    A `cf.Query` object for a "minute of the hour" condition
`cf.second`    A `cf.Query` object for a "second of the minute" condition
`cf.jja`       A `cf.Query` object for a "month of year in June, July or August" condition
`cf.son`       A `cf.Query` object for a "month of year in September, October, November" condition
`cf.djf`       A `cf.Query` object for a "month of year in December, January, February" condition
`cf.mam`       A `cf.Query` object for a "month of year in March, April, May" condition
`cf.seasons`   A customizable list of `cf.Query` objects for "seasons in a year" conditions
=============  ===================================================================================

|

=============  ========================================================================
*Coordinate cell conditions*
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Constructor    Description
=============  ========================================================================
`cf.contains`  A `cf.Query` object for a "cell contains" condition
`cf.cellsize`  A `cf.Query` object for a "cell size" condition
`cf.cellgt`    A `cf.Query` object for a "cell bounds strictly greater than" condition
`cf.cellge`    A `cf.Query` object for a "cell bounds greater than or equal" condition
`cf.celllt`    A `cf.Query` object for a "cell bounds strictly less than" condition
`cf.cellle`    A `cf.Query` object for a "cell bounds less than or equal" condition
`cf.cellwi`    A `cf.Query` object for a "cell bounds lie within range" condition
`cf.cellwo`    A `cf.Query` object for a "cell bounds lie without range" condition
=============  ========================================================================

.. code-block:: python
   :caption: *Some examples of 'cf.Query' objects returned by
             constructors.*

   >>> cf.ge(3)
   <CF Query: (ge 3)>
   >>> cf.ge(cf.dt('2000-3-23'))
   <CF Query: (ge 2000-03-23 00:00:00)>
   >>> cf.year(1999)
   <CF Query: year(eq 1999)>
   >>> cf.month(cf.wi(6, 8))
   <CF Query: month(wi [6, 8])>
   >>> cf.jja()
   <CF Query: month(wi (6, 8))>
   >>> cf.contains(4)
   <CF Query: [lower_bounds(le 4) & upper_bounds(ge 4)]>
   >>> cf.cellsize(cf.lt(10, 'degrees'))
   <CF Query: cellsize(lt 10 degrees)>
 
----

.. _Assignment-by-condition:

**Assignment by condition**
---------------------------

Data elements can be changed by assigning to elements selected by
indices of the data (see :ref:`Assignment-by-index`); by conditions
based on the data values of the field construct or one of its metadata
constructs (as described in this section); or by identifying indices
based on arbitrary metadata constructs (see
:ref:`Assignment-by-metadata`).
     
Assignment by condition uses the `~Field.where` method of the field
construct. This method automatically infers indices for assignment
from conditions on the field construct's data, or its metadata. In
addition, different values can be assigned to where the conditions
are, and are not, met

.. code-block:: python
   :caption: *Set all data elements that are less than 273.15 to
             missing data.*

   >>> t = cf.read('file.nc')[1]
   >>> print(t.array)
   [[[262.8 270.5 279.8 269.5 260.9 265.  263.5 278.9 269.2]
     [272.7 268.4 279.5 278.9 263.8 263.3 274.2 265.7 279.5]
     [269.7 279.1 273.4 274.2 279.6 270.2 280.  272.5 263.7]
     [261.7 260.6 270.8 260.3 265.6 279.4 276.9 267.6 260.6]
     [264.2 275.9 262.5 264.9 264.7 270.2 270.4 268.6 275.3]
     [263.9 263.8 272.1 263.7 272.2 264.2 260.  263.5 270.2]
     [273.8 273.1 268.5 272.3 264.3 278.7 270.6 273.  270.6]
     [267.9 273.5 279.8 260.3 261.2 275.3 271.2 260.8 268.9]
     [270.9 278.7 273.2 261.7 271.6 265.8 273.  278.5 266.4]
     [276.4 264.2 276.3 266.1 276.1 268.1 277.  273.4 269.7]]]
   >>> u = t.where(cf.lt(273.15), x=cf.masked)
   >>> print(u.array)
   [[[   --    -- 279.8    --    --    --    -- 278.9    --]
     [   --    -- 279.5 278.9    --    -- 274.2    -- 279.5]
     [   -- 279.1 273.4 274.2 279.6    -- 280.0    --    --]
     [   --    --    --    --    -- 279.4 276.9    --    --]
     [   -- 275.9    --    --    --    --    --    -- 275.3]
     [   --    --    --    --    --    --    --    --    --]
     [273.8    --    --    --    -- 278.7    --    --    --]
     [   -- 273.5 279.8    --    -- 275.3    --    --    --]
     [   -- 278.7 273.2    --    --    --    -- 278.5    --]
     [276.4    -- 276.3    -- 276.1    -- 277.0 273.4    --]]]

.. code-block:: python
   :caption: *Set all data elements that are less than 273.15 to 0,
             and all other elements to 1.*

   >>> u = t.where(cf.lt(273.15), x=0, y=1)
   >>> print(u.array)
   [[[0. 0. 1. 0. 0. 0. 0. 1. 0.]
     [0. 0. 1. 1. 0. 0. 1. 0. 1.]
     [0. 1. 1. 1. 1. 0. 1. 0. 0.]
     [0. 0. 0. 0. 0. 1. 1. 0. 0.]
     [0. 1. 0. 0. 0. 0. 0. 0. 1.]
     [0. 0. 0. 0. 0. 0. 0. 0. 0.]
     [1. 0. 0. 0. 0. 1. 0. 0. 0.]
     [0. 1. 1. 0. 0. 1. 0. 0. 0.]
     [0. 1. 1. 0. 0. 0. 0. 1. 0.]
     [1. 0. 1. 0. 1. 0. 1. 1. 0.]]]

.. code-block:: python
   :caption: *Where the data of field 'u' is True, multiply all
             elements of 't' by -1, and at all other points set 't' to
             -99.*

   >>> print(t.where(u, x=-t, y=-99).array)
   [[[ -99.   -99.  -279.8  -99.   -99.   -99.   -99.  -278.9  -99. ]
     [ -99.   -99.  -279.5 -278.9  -99.   -99.  -274.2  -99.  -279.5]
     [ -99.  -279.1 -273.4 -274.2 -279.6  -99.  -280.   -99.   -99. ]
     [ -99.   -99.   -99.   -99.   -99.  -279.4 -276.9  -99.   -99. ]
     [ -99.  -275.9  -99.   -99.   -99.   -99.   -99.   -99.  -275.3]
     [ -99.   -99.   -99.   -99.   -99.   -99.   -99.   -99.   -99. ]
     [-273.8  -99.   -99.   -99.   -99.  -278.7  -99.   -99.   -99. ]
     [ -99.  -273.5 -279.8  -99.   -99.  -275.3  -99.   -99.   -99. ]
     [ -99.  -278.7 -273.2  -99.   -99.   -99.   -99.  -278.5  -99. ]
     [-276.4  -99.  -276.3  -99.  -276.1  -99.  -277.  -273.4  -99. ]]]

The `~Field.where` method also allows the condition to be applied to a
metadata construct's data:
     
.. code-block:: python
   :caption: *Where the 'Y' coordinates are greater than 0.5, set the
             field construct data to missing data.*

   >>> print(t.where(cf.gt(0.5), x=cf.masked, construct='grid_latitude').array)
   [[[   --    --    --    --    --    --    --    --    --]
     [   --    --    --    --    --    --    --    --    --]
     [   --    --    --    --    --    --    --    --    --]
     [   --    --    --    --    --    --    --    --    --]
     [264.2 275.9 262.5 264.9 264.7 270.2 270.4 268.6 275.3]
     [263.9 263.8 272.1 263.7 272.2 264.2 260.0 263.5 270.2]
     [273.8 273.1 268.5 272.3 264.3 278.7 270.6 273.0 270.6]
     [267.9 273.5 279.8 260.3 261.2 275.3 271.2 260.8 268.9]
     [270.9 278.7 273.2 261.7 271.6 265.8 273.0 278.5 266.4]
     [276.4 264.2 276.3 266.1 276.1 268.1 277.0 273.4 269.7]]]

The :ref:`hardness of the mask <Masked-values>` is respected by the
`~Field.where` method, so missing data in the field construct can only
be unmasked if the mask has first been made soft.
     
There are many variants on how the condition and assignment values may
be specified. See the `~Field.where` method documentation for details.

   
----

.. _Field-creation:

**Field creation**
------------------

There are various methods for creating a field construct in memory:

* :ref:`Ab initio creation <Ab-initio-creation>`: Instantiate
  instances of field and metadata construct classes and manually
  provide the connections between them.
..

..

* :ref:`Command modification <Command-modification>`: Produce the
  commands that would create an already existing field construct, and
  then modify them.

..

* :ref:`Creation by conversion <Creation-by-conversion>`: Convert a
  single metadata construct already in memory to an independent field
  construct.

..

* :ref:`Creation by reading <Creation-by-reading>`: Create field
  constructs from a dataset on disk.

..
  
* :ref:`Creation with the cfa command line tool <Creation-with-cfa>`:
  Create field constructs from existing datasets on disk.

Note that the cf package enables the creation of field constructs, but
CF-compliance is the responsibility of the user. For example, a
``units`` property whose value is not a valid `UDUNITS
<https://www.unidata.ucar.edu/software/udunits>`_ string is not
CF-compliant, but is allowed by the cf package.

.. _Ab-initio-creation:

Ab initio creation
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Ab initio creation of a field construct has three stages:

**Stage 1:** The field construct is created without metadata
constructs.

..
   
**Stage 2:** Metadata constructs are created independently.

..

**Stage 3:** The metadata constructs are inserted into the field
construct with cross-references to other, related metadata constructs
if required. For example, an auxiliary coordinate construct is related
to an ordered list of the domain axis constructs which correspond to
its data array dimensions.

There are two equivalent approaches to **stages 1** and **2**.

Either as much of the content as possible is specified during object
instantiation:

.. code-block:: python
   :caption: *Create a field construct with a "standard_name"
             property. Create dimension coordinate and field ancillary
             constructs, both with properties and data.*
	     
   >>> p = cf.Field(properties={'standard_name': 'precipitation_flux'})
   >>> p
   <CF Field: precipitation_flux>
   >>> dc = cf.DimensionCoordinate(properties={'long_name': 'Longitude'},
   ...                               data=cf.Data([0, 1, 2.]))
   >>> dc
   <CF DimensionCoordinate: long_name=Longitude(3) >
   >>> fa = cf.FieldAncillary(
   ...        properties={'standard_name': 'precipitation_flux status_flag'},
   ...        data=cf.Data(numpy.array([0, 0, 2], dtype='int8')))
   >>> fa
   <CF FieldAncillary: precipitation_flux status_flag(3) >

or else some or all content is added after instantiation via object
methods:

.. code-block:: python
   :caption: *Create empty constructs and provide them with properties
             and data after instantiation.*
	     
   >>> p = cf.Field()
   >>> p
   <CF Field: >
   >>> p.set_property('standard_name', 'precipitation_flux')
   >>> p
   <CF Field: precipitation_flux>
   >>> dc = cf.DimensionCoordinate()
   >>> dc
   <CF DimensionCoordinate:  > # TODO
   >>> dc.set_property('long_name', 'Longitude')
   >>> dc.set_data(cf.Data([1, 2, 3.]))
   >>> dc
   <CF DimensionCoordinate: long_name=Longitude(3) >
   >>> fa = cf.FieldAncillary(
   ...             data=cf.Data(numpy.array([0, 0, 2], dtype='int8')))
   >>> fa
   <CF FieldAncillary: (3) >
   >>> fa.set_property('standard_name', 'precipitation_flux status_flag')
   >>> fa
   <CF FieldAncillary: precipitation_flux status_flag(3) >

For **stage 3**, the `~cf.Field.set_construct` method of the field
construct is used for setting metadata constructs and mapping data
array dimensions to domain axis constructs. The domain axis constructs
spanned by the data are inferred from the existing domain axis
constructs, provided that there are no ambiguities (such as two
dimensions of the same size), in which case they can be explicitly
provided via their construct keys. This method returns the construct
key for the metadata construct which can be used when other metadata
constructs are added to the field (e.g. to specify which domain axis
constructs correspond to a data array), or when other metadata
constructs are created (e.g. to identify the domain ancillary
constructs forming part of a coordinate reference construct):

.. code-block:: python
   :caption: *Set a domain axis construct and use its construct key
             when setting the dimension coordinate construct. Also
             create a cell method construct that applies to the domain
             axis construct.*
	     
   >>> longitude_axis = p.set_construct(cf.DomainAxis(3))
   >>> longitude_axis
   'domainaxis0'
   >>> key = p.set_construct(dc, axes=longitude_axis)
   >>> key
   'dimensioncoordinate0'
   >>> cm = cf.CellMethod(axes=longitude_axis, method='minimum')
   >>> p.set_construct(cm)
   'cellmethod0'
   
In general, the order in which metadata constructs are added to the
field does not matter, except when one metadata construct is required
by another, in which case the former must be added to the field first
so that its construct key is available to the latter. Cell method
constructs must, however, be set in the relative order in which their
methods were applied to the data.

The domain axis constructs spanned by a metadata construct's data may
be changed after insertion with the `~Field.set_data_axes` method of
the field construct.

.. Code Block 1
.. code-block:: python
   :caption: *Create a field construct with properties; data; and domain axis, cell method and dimension coordinate metadata constructs (data arrays have been generated with dummy values using numpy.arange).*

   import numpy
   import cf

   # Initialise the field construct with properties
   Q = cf.Field(properties={'project': 'research',
                              'standard_name': 'specific_humidity',
                              'units': '1'})
			      
   # Create the domain axis constructs
   domain_axisT = cf.DomainAxis(1)
   domain_axisY = cf.DomainAxis(5)
   domain_axisX = cf.DomainAxis(8)

   # Insert the domain axis constructs into the field. The
   # set_construct method returns the domain axis construct key that
   # will be used later to specify which domain axis corresponds to
   # which dimension coordinate construct.
   axisT = Q.set_construct(domain_axisT)
   axisY = Q.set_construct(domain_axisY)
   axisX = Q.set_construct(domain_axisX)

   # Create and insert the field construct data
   data = cf.Data(numpy.arange(40.).reshape(5, 8))
   Q.set_data(data)

   # Create the cell method constructs
   cell_method1 = cf.CellMethod(axes='area', method='mean')

   cell_method2 = cf.CellMethod()
   cell_method2.set_axes(axisT)
   cell_method2.set_method('maximum')

   # Insert the cell method constructs into the field in the same
   # order that their methods were applied to the data
   Q.set_construct(cell_method1)
   Q.set_construct(cell_method2)

   # Create a "time" dimension coordinate construct, with coordinate
   # bounds
   dimT = cf.DimensionCoordinate(
                               properties={'standard_name': 'time',
                                           'units': 'days since 2018-12-01'},
                               data=cf.Data([15.5]),
                               bounds=cf.Bounds(data=cf.Data([[0,31.]])))

   # Create a "longitude" dimension coordinate construct, without
   # coordinate bounds
   dimX = cf.DimensionCoordinate(data=cf.Data(numpy.arange(8.)))
   dimX.set_properties({'standard_name': 'longitude',
                        'units': 'degrees_east'})

   # Create a "longitude" dimension coordinate construct
   dimY = cf.DimensionCoordinate(properties={'standard_name': 'latitude',
		                             'units'        : 'degrees_north'})
   array = numpy.arange(5.)
   dimY.set_data(cf.Data(array))

   # Create and insert the latitude coordinate bounds
   bounds_array = numpy.empty((5, 2))
   bounds_array[:, 0] = array - 0.5
   bounds_array[:, 1] = array + 0.5
   bounds = cf.Bounds(data=cf.Data(bounds_array))
   dimY.set_bounds(bounds)

   # Insert the dimension coordinate constructs into the field,
   # specifying to which domain axis each one corresponds
   Q.set_construct(dimT)
   Q.set_construct(dimY)
   Q.set_construct(dimX)

.. code-block:: python
   :caption: *Inspect the new field construct.* 
	  
   >>> Q.dump()
   ------------------------
   Field: specific_humidity
   ------------------------
   project = 'research'
   standard_name = 'specific_humidity'
   units = '1'
   
   Data(latitude(5), longitude(8)) = [[0.0, ..., 39.0]] 1
   
   Cell Method: area: mean
   Cell Method: time(1): maximum
   
   Domain Axis: latitude(5)
   Domain Axis: longitude(8)
   Domain Axis: time(1)
   
   Dimension coordinate: time
       standard_name = 'time'
       units = 'days since 2018-12-01'
       Data(time(1)) = [2018-12-16 12:00:00]
       Bounds:Data(time(1), 2) = [[2018-12-01 00:00:00, 2019-01-01 00:00:00]]
   
   Dimension coordinate: latitude
       standard_name = 'latitude'
       units = 'degrees_north'
       Data(latitude(5)) = [0.0, ..., 4.0] degrees_north
       Bounds:Data(latitude(5), 2) = [[-0.5, ..., 4.5]] degrees_north
   
   Dimension coordinate: longitude
       standard_name = 'longitude'
       units = 'degrees_east'
       Data(longitude(8)) = [0.0, ..., 7.0] degrees_east

The ``Conventions`` property does not need to be set because it is
automatically included in output files as a netCDF global
``Conventions`` attribute, either as the CF version of the cf package
(as returned by the `cf.CF` function), or else specified via the
*Conventions* keyword of the `cf.write` function. See
:ref:`Writing-to-a-netCDF-dataset` for details on how to specify
additional conventions.

If this field were to be written to a netCDF dataset then, in the
absence of predefined names, default netCDF variable and dimension
names would be automatically generated (based on standard names where
they exist). The setting of bespoke netCDF names is, however, easily
done with the :ref:`netCDF interface <NetCDF-interface>`.

.. code-block:: python
   :caption: *Set netCDF variable and dimension names for the field
             and metadata constructs.*

   Q.nc_set_variable('q')

   domain_axisT.nc_set_dimension('time')
   domain_axisY.nc_set_dimension('lat')
   domain_axisX.nc_set_dimension('lon')

   dimT.nc_set_variable('time')
   dimY.nc_set_variable('lat')
   dimX.nc_set_variable('lon')

Here is a more complete example which creates a field construct that
contains every type of metadata construct (again, data arrays have
been generated with dummy values using `numpy.arange`):

.. Code Block 2
   
.. code-block:: python
   :caption: *Create a field construct that contains at least one
             instance of each type of metadata construct.*

   import numpy
   import cf
   
   # Initialize the field construct
   tas = cf.Field(
       properties={'project': 'research',
                   'standard_name': 'air_temperature',
                   'units': 'K'})
   
   # Create and set domain axis constructs
   axis_T = tas.set_construct(cf.DomainAxis(1))
   axis_Z = tas.set_construct(cf.DomainAxis(1))
   axis_Y = tas.set_construct(cf.DomainAxis(10))
   axis_X = tas.set_construct(cf.DomainAxis(9))
   
   # Set the field construct data
   tas.set_data(cf.Data(numpy.arange(90.).reshape(10, 9)))
   
   # Create and set the cell method constructs
   cell_method1 = cf.CellMethod(
             axes=[axis_Y, axis_X],
	     method='mean',
             qualifiers={'where': 'land',
                         'interval': [cf.Data(0.1, units='degrees')]})
   
   cell_method2 = cf.CellMethod(axes=axis_T, method='maximum')
   
   tas.set_construct(cell_method1)
   tas.set_construct(cell_method2)
   
   # Create and set the field ancillary constructs
   field_ancillary = cf.FieldAncillary(
                properties={'standard_name': 'air_temperature standard_error',
                             'units': 'K'},
                data=cf.Data(numpy.arange(90.).reshape(10, 9)))
   
   tas.set_construct(field_ancillary)
   
   # Create and set the dimension coordinate constructs
   dimension_coordinate_T = cf.DimensionCoordinate(
                              properties={'standard_name': 'time',
                                          'units': 'days since 2018-12-01'},
                              data=cf.Data([15.5]),
                              bounds=cf.Bounds(data=cf.Data([[0., 31]])))
   
   dimension_coordinate_Z = cf.DimensionCoordinate(
           properties={'computed_standard_name': 'altitude',
                       'standard_name': 'atmosphere_hybrid_height_coordinate'},
           data = cf.Data([1.5]),
           bounds=cf.Bounds(data=cf.Data([[1.0, 2.0]])))
   
   dimension_coordinate_Y = cf.DimensionCoordinate(
           properties={'standard_name': 'grid_latitude',
                       'units': 'degrees'},
           data=cf.Data(numpy.arange(10.)),
           bounds=cf.Bounds(data=cf.Data(numpy.arange(20).reshape(10, 2))))
   
   dimension_coordinate_X = cf.DimensionCoordinate(
           properties={'standard_name': 'grid_longitude',
                       'units': 'degrees'},
       data=cf.Data(numpy.arange(9.)),
       bounds=cf.Bounds(data=cf.Data(numpy.arange(18).reshape(9, 2))))
   
   dim_T = tas.set_construct(dimension_coordinate_T, axes=axis_T)
   dim_Z = tas.set_construct(dimension_coordinate_Z, axes=axis_Z)
   dim_Y = tas.set_construct(dimension_coordinate_Y)
   dim_X = tas.set_construct(dimension_coordinate_X)
   
   # Create and set the auxiliary coordinate constructs
   auxiliary_coordinate_lat = cf.AuxiliaryCoordinate(
                         properties={'standard_name': 'latitude',
                                     'units': 'degrees_north'},
                         data=cf.Data(numpy.arange(90.).reshape(10, 9)))
   
   auxiliary_coordinate_lon = cf.AuxiliaryCoordinate(
                     properties={'standard_name': 'longitude',
                                 'units': 'degrees_east'},
                     data=cf.Data(numpy.arange(90.).reshape(9, 10)))
   
   array = numpy.ma.array(list('abcdefghij'))
   array[0] = numpy.ma.masked
   auxiliary_coordinate_name = cf.AuxiliaryCoordinate(
                          properties={'long_name': 'Grid latitude name'},
                          data=cf.Data(array))
   
   aux_LAT  = tas.set_construct(auxiliary_coordinate_lat) 
   aux_LON  = tas.set_construct(auxiliary_coordinate_lon) 
   aux_NAME = tas.set_construct(auxiliary_coordinate_name)
   
   # Create and set domain ancillary constructs
   domain_ancillary_a = cf.DomainAncillary(
                      properties={'units': 'm'},
                      data=cf.Data([10.]),
                      bounds=cf.Bounds(data=cf.Data([[5., 15.]])))
   
   domain_ancillary_b = cf.DomainAncillary(
                          properties={'units': '1'},
                          data=cf.Data([20.]),
                          bounds=cf.Bounds(data=cf.Data([[14, 26.]])))
   
   domain_ancillary_orog = cf.DomainAncillary(
                             properties={'standard_name': 'surface_altitude',
                                         'units': 'm'},
                             data=cf.Data(numpy.arange(90.).reshape(10, 9)))
   
   domain_anc_A    = tas.set_construct(domain_ancillary_a, axes=axis_Z)
   domain_anc_B    = tas.set_construct(domain_ancillary_b, axes=axis_Z)
   domain_anc_OROG = tas.set_construct(domain_ancillary_orog)

   # Create the datum for the coordinate reference constructs
   datum = cf.Datum(parameters={'earth_radius': 6371007.})

   # Create the coordinate conversion for the horizontal coordinate
   # reference construct
   coordinate_conversion_h = cf.CoordinateConversion(
                 parameters={'grid_mapping_name': 'rotated_latitude_longitude',
                             'grid_north_pole_latitude': 38.0,
                             'grid_north_pole_longitude': 190.0})
   
   # Create the coordinate conversion for the vertical coordinate
   # reference construct
   coordinate_conversion_v = cf.CoordinateConversion(
            parameters={'standard_name': 'atmosphere_hybrid_height_coordinate',
                        'computed_standard_name': 'altitude'},
            domain_ancillaries={'a': domain_anc_A,
                                'b': domain_anc_B,
                                'orog': domain_anc_OROG})
   
   # Create the vertical coordinate reference construct
   horizontal_crs = cf.CoordinateReference(
                      datum=datum,
                      coordinate_conversion=coordinate_conversion_h,
                      coordinates=[dim_X,
                                   dim_Y,
                                   aux_LAT,
                                   aux_LON])

   # Create the vertical coordinate reference construct
   vertical_crs = cf.CoordinateReference(
                    datum=datum,
                    coordinate_conversion=coordinate_conversion_v,
                    coordinates=[dim_Z])

   # Set the coordinate reference constructs
   tas.set_construct(horizontal_crs)
   tas.set_construct(vertical_crs)
   
   # Create and set the cell measure constructs
   cell_measure = cf.CellMeasure(measure='area',
                    properties={'units': 'km2'},
                    data=cf.Data(numpy.arange(90.).reshape(9, 10)))
   
   tas.set_construct(cell_measure)

The new field construct may now be inspected:

.. code-block:: python
   :caption: *Inspect the new field construct.*

   >>> print(tas)
   Field: air_temperature
   ----------------------
   Data            : air_temperature(grid_latitude(10), grid_longitude(9)) K
   Cell methods    : grid_latitude(10): grid_longitude(9): mean where land (interval: 0.1 degrees) time(1): maximum
   Field ancils    : air_temperature standard_error(grid_latitude(10), grid_longitude(9)) = [[0.0, ..., 89.0]] K
   Dimension coords: time(1) = [2018-12-16 12:00:00]
                   : atmosphere_hybrid_height_coordinate(1) = [1.5]
                   : grid_latitude(10) = [0.0, ..., 9.0] degrees
                   : grid_longitude(9) = [0.0, ..., 8.0] degrees
   Auxiliary coords: latitude(grid_latitude(10), grid_longitude(9)) = [[0.0, ..., 89.0]] degrees_north
                   : longitude(grid_longitude(9), grid_latitude(10)) = [[0.0, ..., 89.0]] degrees_east
                   : long_name=Grid latitude name(grid_latitude(10)) = [--, ..., j]
   Cell measures   : measure:area(grid_longitude(9), grid_latitude(10)) = [[0.0, ..., 89.0]] km2
   Coord references: atmosphere_hybrid_height_coordinate
                   : rotated_latitude_longitude
   Domain ancils   : key%domainancillary0(atmosphere_hybrid_height_coordinate(1)) = [10.0] m
                   : key%domainancillary1(atmosphere_hybrid_height_coordinate(1)) = [20.0] 1
                   : surface_altitude(grid_latitude(10), grid_longitude(9)) = [[0.0, ..., 89.0]] m

.. _Command-modification:

Command modification
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

It is sometimes convenient to produce the commands that would create
an already existing field construct, and then modify them to create
the desired field construct. The commands are produced by the
`~Field.creation_commands` method of the existing field construct.

.. code-block:: python
   :caption: *Produce the commands that would create an existing field
             construct.*
	
   >>> q, t = cf.read('file.nc')
   >>> print(q.creation_commands())
   # field: specific_humidity
   f = cf.Field()
   f.set_properties({'Conventions': 'CF-1.7', 'project': 'research', 'standard_name': 'specific_humidity', 'units': '1'})
   d = cf.Data([[0.007, 0.034, 0.003, 0.014, 0.018, 0.037, 0.024, 0.029], [0.023, 0.036, 0.045, 0.062, 0.046, 0.073, 0.006, 0.066], [0.11, 0.131, 0.124, 0.146, 0.087, 0.103, 0.057, 0.011], [0.029, 0.059, 0.039, 0.07, 0.058, 0.072, 0.009, 0.017], [0.006, 0.036, 0.019, 0.035, 0.018, 0.037, 0.034, 0.013]], units='1', dtype='f8')
   f.set_data(d)
   f.nc_set_variable('q')
   
   # netCDF global attributes
   f.nc_set_global_attributes({'Conventions': None, 'project': None})
   
   # domain_axis: ncdim%lat
   c = cf.DomainAxis()
   c.set_size(5)
   c.nc_set_dimension('lat')
   f.set_construct(c, key='domainaxis0', copy=False)
   
   # domain_axis: ncdim%lon
   c = cf.DomainAxis()
   c.set_size(8)
   c.nc_set_dimension('lon')
   f.set_construct(c, key='domainaxis1', copy=False)
   
   # domain_axis: 
   c = cf.DomainAxis()
   c.set_size(1)
   f.set_construct(c, key='domainaxis2', copy=False)
   
   # field data axes
   f.set_data_axes(('domainaxis0', 'domainaxis1'))
   
   # dimension_coordinate: latitude
   c = cf.DimensionCoordinate()
   c.set_properties({'units': 'degrees_north', 'standard_name': 'latitude'})
   d = cf.Data([-75.0, -45.0, 0.0, 45.0, 75.0], units='degrees_north', dtype='f8')
   c.set_data(d)
   c.nc_set_variable('lat')
   b = cf.Bounds()
   b.set_properties({})
   d = cf.Data([[-90.0, -60.0], [-60.0, -30.0], [-30.0, 30.0], [30.0, 60.0], [60.0, 90.0]], units='degrees_north', dtype='f8')
   b.set_data(d)
   b.nc_set_variable('lat_bnds')
   c.set_bounds(b)
   f.set_construct(c, axes=('domainaxis0',), key='dimensioncoordinate0', copy=False)
   
   # dimension_coordinate: longitude
   c = cf.DimensionCoordinate()
   c.set_properties({'units': 'degrees_east', 'standard_name': 'longitude'})
   d = cf.Data([22.5, 67.5, 112.5, 157.5, 202.5, 247.5, 292.5, 337.5], units='degrees_east', dtype='f8')
   c.set_data(d)
   c.nc_set_variable('lon')
   b = cf.Bounds()
   b.set_properties({})
   d = cf.Data([[0.0, 45.0], [45.0, 90.0], [90.0, 135.0], [135.0, 180.0], [180.0, 225.0], [225.0, 270.0], [270.0, 315.0], [315.0, 360.0]], units='degrees_east', dtype='f8')
   b.set_data(d)
   b.nc_set_variable('lon_bnds')
   c.set_bounds(b)
   f.set_construct(c, axes=('domainaxis1',), key='dimensioncoordinate1', copy=False)
   
   # dimension_coordinate: time
   c = cf.DimensionCoordinate()
   c.set_properties({'units': 'days since 2018-12-01', 'standard_name': 'time'})
   d = cf.Data([31.0], units='days since 2018-12-01', dtype='f8')
   c.set_data(d)
   c.nc_set_variable('time')
   f.set_construct(c, axes=('domainaxis2',), key='dimensioncoordinate2', copy=False)
   
   # cell_method
   c = cf.CellMethod()
   c.set_method('mean')
   c.set_axes(('area',))
   f.set_construct(c)

Some example fields are always available from the `cf.example_field`
function.
   
.. _Creating-data-from-an-array-on-disk:

Creating data from an array on disk
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

All the of above examples use arrays in memory to construct the data
instances for the field and metadata constructs. It is, however,
possible to create data from arrays that reside on disk. The `cf.read`
function creates data in this manner. A pointer to an array in a
netCDF file can be stored in a `cf.NetCDFArray` instance, which is is
used to initialize a `cf.Data` instance.

.. code-block:: python
   :caption: *Define a variable from a dataset with the netCDF package
             and use it to create a NetCDFArray instance with which to
             initialize a Data instance.*
		
   >>> import netCDF4
   >>> nc = netCDF4.Dataset('file.nc', 'r')
   >>> v = nc.variables['ta']
   >>> netcdf_array = cf.NetCDFArray(filename='file.nc', ncvar='ta',
   ...	                               dtype=v.dtype, ndim=v.ndim,
   ...	     		  	       shape=v.shape, size=v.size)
   >>> data_disk = cf.Data(netcdf_array)

  
.. code-block:: python
   :caption: *Read the netCDF variable's data into memory and
             initialise another Data instance with it. Compare the
             values of the two data instances.*

   >>> numpy_array = v[...]
   >>> data_memory = cf.Data(numpy_array)
   >>> data_disk.equals(data_memory)
   True

Note that data type, number of dimensions, dimension sizes and number
of elements of the array on disk that are used to initialize the
`cf.NetCDFArray` instance are those expected by the CF data model,
which may be different to those of the netCDF variable in the file
(although they are the same in the above example). For example, a
netCDF character array of shape ``(12, 9)`` is viewed in cf as a
one-dimensional string array of shape ``(12,)``.

.. _Creation-by-conversion:

Creation by conversion
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

An independent field construct may be created from an existing
metadata construct using `~Field.convert` method of the field
construct, which identifies a unique metadata construct and returns a
new field construct based on its properties and data. The new field
construct always has domain axis constructs corresponding to the data,
and (by default) any other metadata constructs that further define its
domain.

.. code-block:: python
   :caption: *Create an independent field construct from the "surface
             altitude" metadata construct.*

   >>> key = tas.construct_key('surface_altitude')
   >>> orog = tas.convert(key)
   >>> print(orog)
   Field: surface_altitude
   -----------------------
   Data            : surface_altitude(grid_latitude(10), grid_longitude(9)) m
   Dimension coords: grid_latitude(10) = [0.0, ..., 9.0] degrees
                   : grid_longitude(9) = [0.0, ..., 8.0] degrees
   Auxiliary coords: latitude(grid_latitude(10), grid_longitude(9)) = [[0.0, ..., 89.0]] degrees_north
                   : longitude(grid_longitude(9), grid_latitude(10)) = [[0.0, ..., 89.0]] degrees_east
                   : long_name=Grid latitude name(grid_latitude(10)) = [--, ..., j]
   Cell measures   : measure:area(grid_longitude(9), grid_latitude(10)) = [[0.0, ..., 89.0]] km2
   Coord references: rotated_latitude_longitude

The `~Field.convert` method has an option to only include domain axis
constructs in the new field construct, with no other metadata
constructs.

.. code-block:: python
   :caption: *Create an independent field construct from the "surface
             altitude" metadata construct, but without a complete
             domain.*

   >>> orog1 = tas.convert(key, full_domain=False) 
   >>> print(orog1)
   Field: surface_altitude
   -----------------------
   Data            : surface_altitude(key%domainaxis2(10), key%domainaxis3(9)) m
   
.. _Creation-by-reading:

Creation by reading
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The `cf.read` function :ref:`reads a netCDF dataset
<Reading-datasets>` and returns the contents as a list of zero or more
field constructs, each one corresponding to a unique CF-netCDF data
variable in the dataset. For example, the field construct ``tas`` that
was created manually can be :ref:`written to a netCDF dataset
<Writing-to-a-netCDF-dataset>` and then read back into memory:

.. code-block:: python
   :caption: *Write the field construct that was created manually to
             disk, and then read it back into a new field construct.*

   >>> cf.write(tas, 'tas.nc')
   >>> f = cf.read('tas.nc')
   >>> f
   [<CF Field: air_temperature(atmosphere_hybrid_height_coordinate(1), grid_latitude(10), grid_longitude(9)) K>]

The `cf.read` function also allows field constructs to be derived
directly from the netCDF variables that correspond to particular types
metadata constructs. In this case, the new field constructs will have
a domain limited to that which can be inferred from the corresponding
netCDF variable, but without the connections that are defined by the
parent netCDF data variable. This will often result in a new field
construct that has fewer metadata constructs than one created with the
`~Field.convert` method.

.. code-block:: python
   :caption: *Read the file, treating formula terms netCDF variables
             (which map to domain ancillary constructs) as additional
             CF-netCDF data variables.*

   >>> fields = cf.read('tas.nc', extra='domain_ancillary')
   >>> fields
   [<CF Field: ncvar%a(atmosphere_hybrid_height_coordinate(1)) m>,
    <CF Field: air_temperature(atmosphere_hybrid_height_coordinate(1), grid_latitude(10), grid_longitude(9)) K>,
    <CF Field: ncvar%b(atmosphere_hybrid_height_coordinate(1)) 1>,
    <CF Field: surface_altitude(grid_latitude(10), grid_longitude(9)) m>]
   >>> orog_from_file = fields[3]
   >>> print(orog_from_file)
   Field: surface_altitude (ncvar%surface_altitude)
   ------------------------------------------------
   Data            : surface_altitude(grid_latitude(10), grid_longitude(9)) m
   Dimension coords: grid_latitude(10) = [0.0, ..., 9.0] degrees
                   : grid_longitude(9) = [0.0, ..., 8.0] degrees

Comparing the field constructs ``orog_from_file`` (created with
`cf.read`) and ``orog`` (created with the `~Field.convert` method of
the ``tas`` field construct), the former lacks the auxiliary
coordinate, cell measure and coordinate reference constructs of the
latter. This is because the surface altitude netCDF variable in
``tas.nc`` does not have the ``coordinates``, ``cell_measures`` nor
``grid_mapping`` netCDF attributes that would link it to auxiliary
coordinate, cell measure and grid mapping netCDF variables.

.. _Creation-with-cfa:

Creation with cfa
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The ``cfa`` command line tool may be used to :ref:`inspect datasets on
disk <File-inspection-with-cfa>` and also to create new datasets from
them. :ref:`Aggregation <Aggregation>` may be carried out within
files, or within and between files, or not used; and :ref:`external
variables <External-variables>` may be incorporated.

.. code-block:: console
   :caption: *Use cfa to create new, single dataset that combines the
             field constructs from two files.*

   $ cfa file.nc 
   CF Field: specific_humidity(latitude(5), longitude(8)) 1
   CF Field: air_temperature(atmosphere_hybrid_height_coordinate(1), grid_latitude(10), grid_longitude(9)) K
   $ cfa air_temperature.nc 
   CF Field: air_temperature(time(2), latitude(73), longitude(96)) K
   $ cfa -o new_dataset.nc file.nc air_temperature.nc
   $ cfa  new_dataset.nc
   CF Field: specific_humidity(latitude(5), longitude(8)) 1
   CF Field: air_temperature(atmosphere_hybrid_height_coordinate(1), grid_latitude(10), grid_longitude(9)) K
   CF Field: air_temperature(time(2), latitude(73), longitude(96)) K

----

.. _Copying:

**Copying**
-----------

A field construct may be copied with its `~Field.copy` method. This
produces a "deep copy", i.e. the new field construct is completely
independent of the original field.

.. code-block:: python
   :caption: *Copy a field construct and change elements of the copy,
             showing that the original field construct has not been
             altered.*
     
   >>> u = t.copy()
   >>> u.data[0, 0, 0] = -1e30
   >>> u.data[0, 0, 0]
   <CF Data(1, 1, 1): [[[-1e+30]]] K>
   >>> t.data[0, 0, 0]
   <CF Data(1, 1, 1): [[[-1.0]]] K>
   >>> u.del_construct('grid_latitude')
   <CF DimensionCoordinate: grid_latitude(10) degrees>
   >>> u.constructs('grid_latitude')
   {}
   >>> t.constructs('grid_latitude')
   {'dimensioncoordinate1': <CF DimensionCoordinate: grid_latitude(10) degrees>}

Equivalently, the `copy.deepcopy` function may be used:

.. code-block:: python
   :caption: *Copy a field construct with the built-in copy module.*
	    
   >>> import copy
   >>> u = copy.deepcopy(t)

Metadata constructs may be copied individually in the same manner:

.. code-block:: python
   :caption: *Copy a metadata construct.*

   >>> orog = t.constructs('surface_altitude').value().copy()

Arrays within `cf.Data` instances are copied with a `copy-on-write
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Copy-on-write>`_ technique. This means
that a copy takes up very little memory, even when the original
constructs contain very large data arrays, and the copy operation is
fast.

.. _Field-list-copying:

Field list copying
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

A :ref:`field list <Field-lists>` also has a `~FieldList.copy` method
that creates a new field list containing copies all of the field
construct elements.

----

.. _Equality:

**Equality**
------------

Whether or not two field constructs are the same is tested with either
field construct's `~Field.equals` method.

.. code-block:: python
   :caption: *A field construct is always equal to itself, a copy of
             itself and a complete subspace of itself. The "verbose"
             keyword will give some (but not necessarily all) of the
             reasons why two field constructs are not the same.*
	     
   >>> t.equals(t)
   True
   >>> t.equals(t.copy())
   True
   >>> t.equals(t[...])
   True
   >>> t.equals(q)
   False
   >>> t.equals(q, verbose=2)
   Field: Different Units: <Units: K> != <Units: 1>
   False

.. tip:: To return specific detail about the differences between two
         constructs, should they not be equal, increase the verbosity
         of the `equals` method (or globally, see
         :ref:`Controlling-output-messages`),
         as demonstrated in an example above.

         Otherwise, for default verbosity, only a `True` or `False`
         result will be given.

Equality is strict by default. This means that for two field
constructs to be considered equal they must have corresponding
metadata constructs and for each pair of constructs:

* the descriptive properties must be the same (with the exception of
  the field construct's ``Conventions`` property, which is never
  checked), and vector-valued properties must have same the size and
  be element-wise equal, and
  
* if there are data arrays then they must have same shape, data type
  and be element-wise equal.

Two real numbers :math:`x` and :math:`y` are considered equal if
:math:`|x - y| \le a_{tol} + r_{tol}|y|`, where :math:`a_{tol}` (the
tolerance on absolute differences) and :math:`r_{tol}` (the tolerance
on relative differences) are positive, typically very small
numbers. By default both are set to the system epsilon (the difference
between 1 and the least value greater than 1 that is representable as
a float). Their values may be inspected and changed with the
`cf.atol` and `cf.rtol` functions:

.. code-block:: python
   :caption: *The atol and rtol functions allow the numerical equality
             tolerances to be inspected and changed.*
      
   >>> cf.atol()
   2.220446049250313e-16
   >>> cf.rtol()
   2.220446049250313e-16
   >>> original = cf.rtol(0.00001)
   >>> cf.rtol()
   1e-05
   >>> cf.rtol(original)
   1e-05
   >>> cf.rtol()
   2.220446049250313e-16

Note that the above equation is not symmetric in :math:`x` and
:math:`y`, so that for two fields ``f1`` and ``f2``, ``f1.equals(f2)``
may be different from ``f2.equals(f1)`` in some rare cases.
   
NetCDF elements, such as netCDF variable and dimension names, do not
constitute part of the CF data model and so are not checked on any
construct.

The `~Field.equals` method has optional parameters for modifying the
criteria for considering two fields to be equal:

* named properties may be omitted from the comparison,

* fill value and missing data value properties may be ignored,

* the data type of data arrays may be ignored, and

* the tolerances on absolute and relative differences for numerical
  comparisons may be temporarily changed, without changing the default
  settings.
  
Metadata constructs may also be tested for equality:

.. code-block:: python
   :caption: *Metadata constructs also have an equals method, that
             behaves in a similar manner.*
	  
   >>> orog = t.constructs('surface_altitude').value()
   >>> orog.equals(orog.copy())
   True


.. _Field-list-equality:

Field list equality
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

A :ref:`field list <Field-lists>` also has an `~FieldList.equals`
method that compares two field lists. It returns `True` if and only if
field constructs at the same index are equal. This method also has an
*unordered* parameter that, when `True`, treats the two field lists as
unordered collections of field constructs, i.e. in this case `True` is
returned if and only if field constructs are pair-wise equal,
irrespective of their positions in the list.


----
   
.. _NetCDF-interface:

**NetCDF interface**
--------------------

The logical CF data model is independent of netCDF, but the CF
conventions are designed to enable the processing and sharing of
datasets stored in netCDF files. Therefore, the cf package includes
methods for recording and editing netCDF elements that are not part of
the CF model, but are nonetheless often required to interpret and
create CF-netCDF datasets. See the section on :ref:`philosophy
<philosophy>` for a further discussion.

When a netCDF dataset is read, netCDF elements (such as dimension and
variable names, and some attribute values) that do not have a place in
the CF data model are, nevertheless, stored within the appropriate
cf constructs. This allows them to be used when writing field
constructs to a new netCDF dataset, and also makes them accessible as
filters to a `cf.Constructs` instance:

.. code-block:: python
   :caption: *Retrieve metadata constructs based on their netCDF
             names.*
	  
   >>> print(t.constructs.filter_by_ncvar('b'))
   Constructs:
   {'domainancillary1': <CF DomainAncillary: ncvar%b(1) >}
   >>> t.constructs('ncvar%x').value()
   <CF DimensionCoordinate: grid_longitude(9) degrees>
   >>> t.constructs('ncdim%x')
   <CF Constructs: domain_axis(1)>
     
Each construct has methods to access the netCDF elements which it
requires. For example, the field construct has the following methods:

===================================================  ======================================
Method                                               Description
===================================================  ======================================
`~Field.nc_get_variable`                             Return the netCDF variable name
`~Field.nc_set_variable`                             Set the netCDF variable name
`~Field.nc_del_variable`                             Remove the netCDF variable name
				                     
`~Field.nc_has_variable`                             Whether the netCDF variable name has
                                                     been set
				                     
`~Field.nc_global_attributes`                        Return the selection of properties to 
                                                     be written as netCDF global attributes
				                     
`~Field.nc_set_global_attribute`                     Set a property to be written as a
                                                     netCDF global attribute
					             
`~Field.nc_set_global_attributes`                    Set properties to be written as
                                                     netCDF global attributes
					             
`~Field.nc_clear_global_attributes`                  Clear the selection of properties
                                                     to be written as netCDF global
                                                     attributes
					             
`~Field.nc_group_attributes`                         Return the selection of properties to 
                                                     be written as netCDF group attributes
				                     
`~Field.nc_set_group_attribute`                      Set a property to be written as a
                                                     netCDF group attribute
					             
`~Field.nc_set_group_attributes`                     Set properties to be written as
                                                     netCDF group attributes
					             
`~Field.nc_clear_group_attributes`                   Clear the selection of properties
                                                     to be written as netCDF group
                                                     attributes
					             
`~Field.nc_variable_groups`                          Return the netCDF group structure
					             
`~Field.nc_set_variable_groups`                      Set the netCDF group structure
					             
`~Field.nc_clear_variable_groups`                    Remove the netCDF group structure
					             
`~Field.nc_geometry_variable_groups`                 Return the netCDF geometry
                                                     variable ggroup structure
					             
`~Field.nc_set_geometry_variable_groups`             Set the netCDF geometry
                                                     variable group structure
					             
`~Field.nc_clear_geometry_variable_groups`           Remove the netCDF geometry
                                                     variable group structure
					             
`~Field.nc_del_component_variable`                   Remove the netCDF variable name for
                                                     all components of the given type.

`~Field.nc_set_component_variable`                   Set the netCDF variable name for all
                                                     components of the given type.

`~Field.nc_set_component_variable_groups`            Set the netCDF variable groups
                                                     hierarchy for all components of
						     the given type.

`~Field.nc_clear_component_variable_groups`          Remove the netCDF variable groups
                                                     hierarchy for all components of the
						     given type.

`~Field.nc_del_component_dimension`                  Remove the netCDF dimension name for
                                                     all components of the given type.

`~Field.nc_set_component_dimension`                  Set the netCDF dimension name for all
                                                     components of the given type.

`~Field.nc_set_component_dimension_groups`           Set the netCDF dimension groups
                                                     hierarchy for all components of the
						     given type.

`~Field.nc_clear_component_dimension_groups`         Remove the netCDF dimension groups
                                                     hierarchy for all components of the
						     given type.

`~Field.nc_del_component_sample_dimension`           Remove the netCDF sample dimension
                                                     name for all components of the given type.

`~Field.nc_set_component_sample_dimension`           Set the netCDF sample dimension name
                                                     for all components of the given type.

`~Field.nc_set_component_sample_dimension_groups`    Set the netCDF sample dimension
                                                     groups hierarchy for all components
						     of the given type.

`~Field.nc_clear_component_sample_dimension_groups`  Remove the netCDF sample dimension
                                                     groups hierarchy for all components
						     of the given type.
===================================================  ======================================

.. code-block:: python
   :caption: *Access netCDF elements associated with the field and
             metadata constructs.*

   >>> q.nc_get_variable()
   'q'
   >>> q.nc_global_attributes()
   {'Conventions': None, 'project': None}
   >>> q.nc_set_variable('humidity')
   >>> q.nc_get_variable()
   'humidity'
   >>> q.constructs('latitude').value().nc_get_variable()
   'lat'

The complete collection of netCDF interface methods is:

=============================================  =======================================  =====================================
Method                                         Classes                                  NetCDF element
=============================================  =======================================  =====================================
`!nc_del_variable`                             `Field`, `DimensionCoordinate`,          Variable name
                                               `AuxiliaryCoordinate`, `CellMeasure`,
                                               `DomainAncillary`, `FieldAncillary`,
                                               `CoordinateReference`,  `Bounds`,
			                       `Datum`, `Count`, `Index`, `List`
			                       				
`!nc_get_variable`                             `Field`, `DimensionCoordinate`,          Variable name
                                               `AuxiliaryCoordinate`, `CellMeasure`,
                                               `DomainAncillary`, `FieldAncillary`,
                                               `CoordinateReference`, `Bounds`,
			                       `Datum`, `Count`, `Index`, `List`
			                       
`!nc_has_variable`                             `Field`, `DimensionCoordinate`,          Variable name
                                               `AuxiliaryCoordinate`, `CellMeasure`,
                                               `DomainAncillary`, `FieldAncillary`,
                                               `CoordinateReference`, `Bounds`,
			                       `Datum`, `Count`, `Index`, `List`
			                       
`!nc_set_variable`                             `Field`, `DimensionCoordinate`,          Variable name
                                               `AuxiliaryCoordinate`, `CellMeasure`,
                                               `DomainAncillary`, `FieldAncillary`,
                                               `CoordinateReference`, `Bounds`,
			                       `Datum`, `Count`, `Index`, `List`
			                       
`!nc_variable_groups`                          `Field`, `DimensionCoordinate`,          Group hierarchy
                                               `AuxiliaryCoordinate`, `CellMeasure`,
                                               `DomainAncillary`, `FieldAncillary`,
                                               `CoordinateReference`, `Bounds`,
			                       `Datum`, `Count`, `Index`, `List`
			                       
`!nc_set_variable_groups`                      `Field`, `DimensionCoordinate`,          Group hierarchy
                                               `AuxiliaryCoordinate`, `CellMeasure`,
                                               `DomainAncillary`, `FieldAncillary`,
                                               `CoordinateReference`, `Bounds`,
			                       `Datum`, `Count`, `Index`, `List`
			                       
`!nc_clear_variable_groups`                    `Field`, `DimensionCoordinate`,          Group hierarchy
                                               `AuxiliaryCoordinate`, `CellMeasure`,
                                               `DomainAncillary`, `FieldAncillary`,
                                               `CoordinateReference`, `Bounds`,
			                       `Datum`, `Count`, `Index`, `List`
			                       
`!nc_del_dimension`                            `DomainAxis`, `Bounds`, `Count`,         Dimension name
                                               `Index`
			                       
`!nc_get_dimension`	                       `DomainAxis`, `Bounds`, `Count`,         Dimension name
                                               `Index`
			                       			                    
`!nc_has_dimension`	                       `DomainAxis`, `Bounds`, `Count`,         Dimension name
                                               `Index`
			                       			                    
`!nc_set_dimension`	                       `DomainAxis`, `Bounds`, `Count`,         Dimension name
                                               `Index`
			                       
`!nc_dimension_groups`                         `DomainAxis`, `Bounds`, `Count`,         Group hierarchy
                                               `Index`
			                       
`!nc_set_dimension_groups`	               `DomainAxis`, `Bounds`, `Count`,         Group hierarchy
                                               `Index`
			                       			                    
`!nc_clear_dimension_groups`	               `DomainAxis`, `Bounds`, `Count`,         Group hierarchy
                                               `Index`
				               
`!nc_is_unlimited`                             `DomainAxis`                             Unlimited dimension
				               
`!nc_set_unlimited` 	                       `DomainAxis`   	                        Unlimited dimension
				               
`!nc_global_attributes`	                       `Field`                                  Global attributes
			                       
`!nc_set_global_attribute`                     `Field`                                  Global attributes
			                       
`!nc_set_global_attributes`                    `Field`                                  Global attributes
			                       
`!nc_clear_global_attributes`                  `Field`                                  Global attributes
				               
`!nc_variable_groups`                          `Field`                                  Group hierarchy
 				               
`!nc_set_variable_groups`                      `Field`                                  Group hierarchy
 				               
`!nc_clear_variable_groups`                    `Field`                                  Group hierarchy
				               
`!nc_geometry_variable_groups`                 `Field`                                  Group hierarchy
 				               
`!nc_set_geometry_variable_groups`             `Field`                                  Group hierarchy
 				               
`!nc_clear_geometry_variable_groups`           `Field`                                  Group hierarchy
				               
`!nc_group_attributes`	                       `Field`                                  Group attributes
			                       
`!nc_set_group_attribute`                      `Field`                                  Group attributes
			                       
`!nc_set_group_attributes`                     `Field`                                  Group attributes
			                       
`!nc_clear_group_attributes`                   `Field`                                  Group attributes
			                       
`!nc_del_component_variable`                   `Field`                                  Component common netCDF properties

`!nc_set_component_variable`                   `Field`                                  Component common netCDF properties
					       
`!nc_set_component_variable_groups`            `Field`                                  Component common netCDF properties
					       
`!nc_clear_component_variable_groups`          `Field`                                  Component common netCDF properties
					       
`!nc_del_component_dimension`                  `Field`                                  Component common netCDF properties
					       
`!nc_set_component_dimension`                  `Field`                                  Component common netCDF properties
					       
`!nc_set_component_dimension_groups`           `Field`                                  Component common netCDF properties
					       
`!nc_clear_component_dimension_groups`         `Field`                                  Component common netCDF properties

`!nc_del_component_sample_dimension`           `Field`                                  Component common netCDF properties

`!nc_set_component_sample_dimension`           `Field`                                  Component common netCDF properties

`!nc_set_component_sample_dimension_groups`    `Field`                                  Component common netCDF properties

`!nc_clear_component_sample_dimension_groups`  `Field`                                  Component common netCDF properties

`!nc_get_external`                             `CellMeasure`                            External variable status
				               
`!nc_set_external`                             `CellMeasure`                            External variable status
			                       
`!nc_del_sample_dimension`                     `Count`, `Index`                         Sample dimension name
			                       
`!nc_get_sample_dimension`                     `Count`, `Index`                         Sample dimension name
    			                       
`!nc_has_sample_dimension`                     `Count`, `Index`                         Sample dimension name
			                       
`!nc_set_sample_dimension`                     `Count`, `Index`                         Sample dimension name
				               
`!nc_sample_dimension_groups`                  `Count`                                  Group hierarchy
 				               
`!nc_set_sample_dimension_groups`              `Count`                                  Group hierarchy
 				               
`!nc_clear_sample_dimension_groups`            `Count`                                  Group hierarchy

=============================================  =======================================  =====================================

----

.. _Writing-to-a-netCDF-dataset:
   
**Writing to a netCDF dataset**
-------------------------------

The `cf.write` function writes a field construct, or a sequence of
field constructs, to a new netCDF file on disk:

.. code-block:: python
   :caption: *Write a field construct to a netCDF dataset on disk.*

   >>> print(q)
   Field: specific_humidity (ncvar%humidity)
   -----------------------------------------
   Data            : specific_humidity(latitude(5), longitude(8)) 1
   Cell methods    : area: mean
   Dimension coords: latitude(5) = [-75.0, ..., 75.0] degrees_north
                   : longitude(8) = [22.5, ..., 337.5] degrees_east
                   : time(1) = [2019-01-01 00:00:00]
   >>> cf.write(q, 'q_file.nc')

The new dataset is structured as follows:

.. code-block:: console
   :caption: *Inspect the new dataset with the ncdump command line
             tool.*

   $ ncdump -h q_file.nc
   netcdf q_file {
   dimensions:
   	lat = 5 ;
   	bounds2 = 2 ;
   	lon = 8 ;
   variables:
   	double lat_bnds(lat, bounds2) ;
   	double lat(lat) ;
   		lat:units = "degrees_north" ;
   		lat:standard_name = "latitude" ;
   		lat:bounds = "lat_bnds" ;
   	double lon_bnds(lon, bounds2) ;
   	double lon(lon) ;
   		lon:units = "degrees_east" ;
   		lon:standard_name = "longitude" ;
   		lon:bounds = "lon_bnds" ;
   	double time ;
   		time:units = "days since 2018-12-01" ;
   		time:standard_name = "time" ;
   	double humidity(lat, lon) ;
   		humidity:standard_name = "specific_humidity" ;
   		humidity:cell_methods = "area: mean" ;
   		humidity:units = "1" ;
   		humidity:coordinates = "time" ;
   
   // global attributes:
   		:Conventions = "CF-1.7" ;
   		:project = "research" ;
   }

Note that netCDF is the only available output file format.
   
A sequence of field constructs is written in exactly the same way:
   
.. code-block:: python
   :caption: *Write multiple field constructs to a netCDF dataset on
             disk.*
	     
   >>> x
   [<CF Field: specific_humidity(latitude(5), longitude(8)) 1>,
    <CF Field: air_temperature(atmosphere_hybrid_height_coordinate(1), grid_latitude(10), grid_longitude(9)) K>]
   >>> cf.write(x, 'new_file.nc')

By default the output file will be for CF-|version|.
   
The `cf.write` function has optional parameters to

* set the output netCDF format (all netCDF3 and netCDF4 formats are
  possible);

* specify which field construct properties should become netCDF data
  variable attributes and which should become netCDF global
  attributes;
  
* set extra netCDF global attributes;
  
* create :ref:`external variables <External-variables>` in an external
  file;

* specify the version of the CF conventions (from CF-1.6 up to
  CF-|version|), and of any other conventions that the file adheres
  to;

* change the data type of output data arrays;
  
* apply netCDF compression and packing; and

* set the endian-ness of the output data.

Output netCDF variable and dimension names read from a netCDF dataset
are stored in the resulting field constructs, and may also be set
manually with the `~Field.nc_set_variable`, `~Field.nc_set_dimension`
and `~Field.nc_set_sample_dimension` methods. If a name has not been
set then one will be generated internally (usually based on the
standard name if it exists).

It is possible to create netCDF unlimited dimensions using the
`~DomainAxis.nc_set_unlimited` method of the domain axis construct.

A field construct is not transformed through being written to a file
on disk and subsequently read back from that file.

.. code-block:: python
   :caption: *Read a file that has been created by writing a field
             construct, and compare the result with the original field
             construct in memory.*
	     
   >>> f = cf.read('q_file.nc')[0]
   >>> q.equals(f)
   True


.. _Global-attributes:

Global attributes
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The field construct properties that correspond to the standardised
description-of-file-contents attributes are automatically written as
netCDF global attributes. Other attributes may also be written as
netCDF global attributes if they have been identified as such with the
*global_attributes* keyword, or via the
`~Field.nc_set_global_attribute` or `~Field.nc_set_global_attributes`
methods of the field constructs. In either case, the creation of a
netCDF global attribute depends on the corresponding property values
being identical across all of the field constructs being written to
the file. If they are all equal then the property will be written as a
netCDF global attribute and not as an attribute of any netCDF data
variable; if any differ then the property is written only to each
netCDF data variable.

.. code-block:: python
   :caption: *Request that the "model" property is written as a netCDF
             global attribute, using the "global_attributes" keyword.*
	     
   >>> f.set_property('model', 'model_A')
   >>> cf.write(f, 'f_file.nc', global_attributes='model')

.. code-block:: python
   :caption: *Request that the "model" property is written as a netCDF
             global attribute, using the "nc_set_global_attribute"
             method.*
	     
   >>> f.nc_global_attributes()
   {'Conventions': None, 'project': None}
   >>> f.nc_set_global_attribute('model')
   >>> f.nc_global_attributes()
   {'Conventions': None, 'project': None, 'model': None}
   >>> cf.write(f, 'f_file.nc')

It is possible to create both a netCDF global attribute and a netCDF
data variable attribute with the same name, but with different
values. This may be done by assigning the global value to the property
name with the `~Field.nc_set_global_attribute` or
`~Field.nc_set_global_attributes` method, or by via the
*file_descriptors* keyword. For the former technique, any
inconsistencies arising from multiple field constructs being written
to the same file will be resolved by omitting the netCDF global
attribute from the file.

.. code-block:: python
   :caption: *Request that the "information" property is written as
             netCDF global and data variable attributes, with
             different values, using the "nc_set_global_attribute"
             method.*
	     
   >>> f.set_property('information', 'variable information')
   >>> f.properties()
   {'Conventions': 'CF-1.7',
    'information': 'variable information',
    'project': 'research',
    'standard_name': 'specific_humidity',
    'units': '1'}
   >>> f.nc_set_global_attribute('information', 'global information')
   >>> f.nc_global_attributes()
   {'Conventions': None,
   'information': 'global information',
    'model': None,
    'project': None}
   >>> cf.write(f, 'f_file.nc')

NetCDF global attributes defined with the *file_descriptors* keyword
of the `cf.write` function will always be written as requested,
independently of the netCDF data variable attributes, and superseding
any global attributes that may have been defined with the
*global_attributes* keyword, or set on the individual field
constructs.

.. code-block:: python
   :caption: *Insist that the "history" property is written as netCDF
             a global attribute, with the "file_descriptors" keyword.*
	     
   >>> cf.write(f, 'f_file.nc', file_descriptors={'history': 'created in 2019'})
   >>> f_file = cf.read('f_file.nc')[0]
   >>> f_file.nc_global_attributes()
   >>> f_file.properties()
   {'Conventions': 'CF-1.7',
    'history': 'created in 2019',
    'information': 'variable information',
    'model': 'model_A',
    'project': 'research',
    'standard_name': 'specific_humidity',
    'units': '1'}
   >>> f_file.nc_global_attributes()
   {'Conventions': None,
    'history': None,
    'information': 'global information',
    'project': None}

.. _Conventions:

Conventions
^^^^^^^^^^^

The ``Conventions`` netCDF global attribute containing the version of
the CF conventions is always automatically created. If the version of
the CF conventions has been set as a field property, or with the
*Conventions* keyword of the `cf.write` function, then it is
ignored. However, other conventions that may apply can be set with
either technique.

.. code-block:: python
   :caption: *Two ways to add additional conventions to the
             "Conventions" netCDF global attribute.*
	     
   >>> f_file.set_property('Conventions', 'UGRID1.0')
   >>> cf.write(f, 'f_file.nc', Conventions='UGRID1.0')   

   
.. _Scalar-coordinate-variables:

Scalar coordinate variables
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

A CF-netCDF scalar (i.e. zero-dimensional) coordinate variable is
created from a size one dimension coordinate construct that spans a
domain axis construct which is not spanned by the field construct's
data, nor the data of any other metadata construct. This occurs for
the field construct ``q``, for which the "time" dimension coordinate
construct was to the file ``q_file.nc`` as a scalar coordinate
variable.

To change this so that the "time" dimension coordinate construct is
written as a CF-netCDF size one coordinate variable, the field
construct's data must be expanded to span the corresponding size one
domain axis construct, by using the `~Field.insert_dimension` method
of the field construct.

.. code-block:: python
   :caption: *Write the "time" dimension coordinate construct to a
             (non-scalar) CF-netCDF coordinate variable by inserting
             the corresponding dimension into the field construct's
             data.*
		   
   >>> print(q)
   Field: specific_humidity (ncvar%humidity)
   -----------------------------------------
   Data            : specific_humidity(latitude(5), longitude(8)) 1
   Cell methods    : area: mean
   Dimension coords: latitude(5) = [-75.0, ..., 75.0] degrees_north
                   : longitude(8) = [22.5, ..., 337.5] degrees_east
                   : time(1) = [2019-01-01 00:00:00]
   <CF Field: specific_humidity(latitude(5), longitude(8)) 1>
   >>> key = q.construct_key('time')
   >>> axes = q.get_data_axes(key)
   >>> axes
   ('domainaxis2',)
   >>> q2 = q.insert_dimension(axis=axes[0])
   >>> q2
   <CF Field: specific_humidity(time(1), latitude(5), longitude(8)) 1>
   >>> cf.write(q2, 'q2_file.nc')

The new dataset is structured as follows (note, relative to file
``q_file.nc``, the existence of the "time" dimension and the lack of a
"coordinates" attribute on the, now three-dimensional, data variable):
   
.. code-block:: console
   :caption: *Inspect the new dataset with the ncdump command line
             tool.*

   $ ncdump -h q2_file.nc
   netcdf q2_file {
   dimensions:
   	lat = 5 ;
   	bounds2 = 2 ;
   	lon = 8 ;
   	time = 1 ;
   variables:
   	double lat_bnds(lat, bounds2) ;
   	double lat(lat) ;
   		lat:units = "degrees_north" ;
   		lat:standard_name = "latitude" ;
   		lat:bounds = "lat_bnds" ;
   	double lon_bnds(lon, bounds2) ;
   	double lon(lon) ;
   		lon:units = "degrees_east" ;
   		lon:standard_name = "longitude" ;
   		lon:bounds = "lon_bnds" ;
   	double time(time) ;
   		time:units = "days since 2018-12-01" ;
   		time:standard_name = "time" ;
   	double humidity(time, lat, lon) ;
   		humidity:units = "1" ;
   		humidity:standard_name = "specific_humidity" ;
   		humidity:cell_methods = "area: mean" ;
   
   // global attributes:
   		:Conventions = "CF-1.7" ;
   		:project = "research" ;
   }

.. _Strings:
  
Strings
^^^^^^^

String-valued data may be written to netCDF files either as netCDF
character arrays with a trailing dimension large enough to contain the
longest value, or as netCDF4 string arrays. The former is allowed for
all formats of netCDF3 and netCDF4 format files; but string arrays may
only be written to netCDF4 format files (note that string arrays can
not be written to netCDF4 classic format files).

By default, netCDF string arrays will be created whenever possible,
and in all other cases netCDF character arrays will be
used. Alternatively, netCDF character arrays can be used in all cases
by setting the *string* keyword of the `cf.write` function.


Groups
^^^^^^

NetCDF4 files with hierarchical groups may be created if a group
structure is defined by the netCDF variable and dimension names,
accessed via the :ref:`netCDF interface <NetCDF-interface>`.  See the
section on :ref:`hierarchical groups <Hierarchical-groups>` for
details.

----
      
.. _Hierarchical-groups:

**Hierarchical groups**
-----------------------

`Hierarchical groups`_ provide a mechanism to structure variables
within netCDF4 datasets, with well defined rules for resolving
references to out-of-group netCDF variables and dimensions.

A group structure that may be applied when writing to disk can be
created ab initio with the :ref:`netCDF interface
<NetCDF-interface>`. For example, the data variable and a coordinate
construct may be moved to a sub-group that has its own group
attribute, and a coordinate construct may be moved to a different
sub-group:

.. code-block:: python
   :caption: *Create a group structure and write it to disk.*

   >>> q, t = cf.read('file.nc')
   >>> print(q)
   Field: specific_humidity (ncvar%/forecast/model/q)
   --------------------------------------------------
   Data            : specific_humidity(latitude(5), longitude(8)) 1
   Cell methods    : area: mean
   Dimension coords: latitude(5) = [-75.0, ..., 75.0] degrees_north
                   : longitude(8) = [22.5, ..., 337.5] degrees_east
                   : time(1) = [2019-01-01 00:00:00]
   >>> q.set_property('comment', 'comment')
   >>> q.nc_set_group_attribute('comment', 'group comment')
   >>> q.nc_set_variable_groups(['forecast', 'model'])
   ()
   >>> q.construct('time').nc_set_variable_groups(['forecast'])
   ()
   >>> cf.write(q, 'grouped.nc')

.. code-block:: console
   :caption: *Inspect the new grouped dataset with the ncdump command
             line tool.*
   
   $ ncdump -h grouped.nc
   netcdf grouped {
   dimensions:
   	   lat = 5 ;
   	   bounds2 = 2 ;
   	   lon = 8 ;
   variables:
   	   double lat_bnds(lat, bounds2) ;
   	   double lat(lat) ;
   	   	   lat:units = "degrees_north" ;
   	   	   lat:standard_name = "latitude" ;
   	   	   lat:bounds = "lat_bnds" ;
   	   double lon_bnds(lon, bounds2) ;
   	   double lon(lon) ;
   	   	   lon:units = "degrees_east" ;
   	   	   lon:standard_name = "longitude" ;
   	   	   lon:bounds = "lon_bnds" ;
   
   // global attributes:
   		   :Conventions = "CF-1.8" ;
   		   :comment = "comment" ;
   
   group: forecast {
     variables:
     	   double time ;
  		   time:units = "days since 2018-12-01" ;
  		   time:standard_name = "time" ;

     group: model {
       variables:
       	   double q(lat, lon) ;
       		   q:project = "research" ;
       		   q:standard_name = "specific_humidity" ;
       		   q:units = "1" ;
       		   q:coordinates = "time" ;
       		   q:cell_methods = "area: mean" ;
   
       // group attributes:
       		   :comment = "group comment" ;
       } // group model
     } // group forecast
   }

When reading a netCDF dataset, the group structure and groups
attributes are recorded and are made accessible via the :ref:`netCDF
interface <NetCDF-interface>`.

.. code-block:: python
   :caption: *Read the grouped file and inspect its group structure.*

   >>> g = cf.read('grouped.nc')[0]
   >>> print(g)
   Field: specific_humidity (ncvar%/forecast/q)
   --------------------------------------------
   Data            : specific_humidity(latitude(5), longitude(8)) 1
   Cell methods    : area: mean
   Dimension coords: latitude(5) = [-75.0, ..., 75.0] degrees_north
                   : longitude(8) = [22.5, ..., 337.5] degrees_east
                   : time(1) = [2019-01-01 00:00:00]
   >>> g.nc_get_variable()
   '/forecast/model/q'
   >>> g.nc_variable_groups()
   ('forecast', 'model')
   >>> g.nc_group_attributes(values=True)
   {'comment': 'group comment'}
   >>> g.construct('latitude').nc_get_variable()
   'lat'
 
By default field constructs are written out to a dataset with their
groups struct (if any) intact. It is always possible, however, to
create a "flat" dataset, i.e. one without any sub-groups. This does
not require the removal of the group structure from the field
construct and all of its components (although that is possible), as it
can be done by simply by overriding the existing group structure by
setting the *group* keyword to `cf.write` to `False`.
   
.. code-block:: python
   :caption: *Write the field construct to a file with the same group
             structure, and also to a flat file.*

   >>> cf.write(g, 'flat.nc', group=False)

NetCDF variables in the flattened output file will inherit any netCDF
group attributes, providing that they are not superceded by variable
attributes. The output netCDF variable and dimension names will be
taken as the basenames of any that have been pre-defined. This is the
case in file ``flat.nc``, for which the netCDF variable ``q`` has
inherited the ``comment`` attribute that was originally set on the
``/forecast/model`` group. NetCDF group attributes may be set and
accessed via the :ref:`netCDF interface <NetCDF-interface>`, for both
netCDF variable and netCDF dimensions.

.. code-block:: console
   :caption: *Inspect the flat version of the dataset with the ncdump
             command line tool.*
   
   $ ncdump -h flat_out.nc
   netcdf flat {
   dimensions:
   	   lat = 5 ;
   	   bounds2 = 2 ;
   	   lon = 8 ;
   variables:
   	   double lat_bnds(lat, bounds2) ;
   	   double lat(lat) ;
   	   	   lat:units = "degrees_north" ;
   	   	   lat:standard_name = "latitude" ;
   	   	   lat:bounds = "lat_bnds" ;
   	   double lon_bnds(lon, bounds2) ;
   	   double lon(lon) ;
   	   	   lon:units = "degrees_east" ;
   	   	   lon:standard_name = "longitude" ;
   	   	   lon:bounds = "lon_bnds" ;
   	   double time ;
   	   	   time:units = "days since 2018-12-01" ;
   	   	   time:standard_name = "time" ;
   	   double q(lat, lon) ;
   	   	   q:comment = "group comment" ;
		   q:project = "research" ;
   	   	   q:standard_name = "specific_humidity" ;
   	   	   q:units = "1" ;
   	   	   q:coordinates = "time" ;
   	   	   q:cell_methods = "area: mean" ;
   		   
   // global attributes:
   		   :Conventions = "CF-1.8" ;
   		   :comment = "comment" ;
   }

The fields constructs read from a grouped file are identical to those
read from the flat version of the file:
   
.. code-block:: python
   :caption: *Demonstrate that the field constructs are indpendent of
             the dataset structure.*

   >>> f = cf.read('flat.nc')[0]
   >>> f.equals(g)
   True

----

.. _External-variables:

**External variables**
----------------------

`External variables`_ are those in a netCDF file that are referred to,
but which are not present in it. Instead, such variables are stored in
other netCDF files known as "external files". External variables may,
however, be incorporated into the field constructs of the dataset, as
if they had actually been stored in the same file, simply by providing
the external file names to the `cf.read` function.

This is illustrated with the files ``parent.nc`` (found in the
:ref:`sample datasets <Sample-datasets>`):

.. code-block:: console
   :caption: *Inspect the parent dataset with the ncdump command line
             tool.*
   
   $ ncdump -h parent.nc
   netcdf parent {
   dimensions:
   	latitude = 10 ;
   	longitude = 9 ;
   variables:
   	double latitude(latitude) ;
   		latitude:units = "degrees_north" ;
   		latitude:standard_name = "latitude" ;
   	double longitude(longitude) ;
   		longitude:units = "degrees_east" ;
   		longitude:standard_name = "longitude" ;
   	double eastward_wind(latitude, longitude) ;
   		eastward_wind:units = "m s-1" ;
   		eastward_wind:standard_name = "eastward_wind" ;
   		eastward_wind:cell_measures = "area: areacella" ;
   
   // global attributes:
   		:Conventions = "CF-1.7" ;
   		:external_variables = "areacella" ;
   }

and ``external.nc`` (found in the :ref:`sample datasets
<Sample-datasets>`):

.. code-block:: console
   :caption: *Inspect the external dataset with the ncdump command
             line tool.*

   $ ncdump -h external.nc 
   netcdf external {
   dimensions:
   	latitude = 10 ;
   	longitude = 9 ;
   variables:
   	double areacella(longitude, latitude) ;
   		areacella:units = "m2" ;
   		areacella:standard_name = "cell_area" ;
   
   // global attributes:
   		:Conventions = "CF-1.7" ;
   }

The dataset in ``parent.nc`` may be read *without* specifying the
external file ``external.nc``. In this case a cell measure construct
is still created, but one without any metadata or data:

.. code-block:: python
   :caption: *Read the parent dataset without specifying the location
             of any external datasets.*

   >>> u = cf.read('parent.nc')[0]
   >>> print(u)
   Field: eastward_wind (ncvar%eastward_wind)
   ------------------------------------------
   Data            : eastward_wind(latitude(10), longitude(9)) m s-1
   Dimension coords: latitude(10) = [0.0, ..., 9.0] degrees
                   : longitude(9) = [0.0, ..., 8.0] degrees
   Cell measures   : measure:area (external variable: ncvar%areacella)

   >>> area = u.constructs('measure:area').value()
   >>> area
   <CF CellMeasure: measure:area >
   >>> area.nc_get_external()
   True
   >>> area.nc_get_variable()
   'areacella'
   >>> area.properties()
   {}
   >>> area.has_data()
   False

If this field construct were to be written to disk using `cf.write`,
then the output file would be identical to the original ``parent.nc``
file, i.e. the netCDF variable name of the cell measure construct
(``areacella``) would be listed by the ``external_variables`` global
attribute.

However, the dataset may also be read *with* the external file. In
this case a cell measure construct is created with all of the metadata
and data from the external file, as if the netCDF cell measure
variable had been present in the parent dataset:

.. code-block:: python
   :caption: *Read the parent dataset whilst providing the external
             dataset containing the external variables.*
   
   >>> g = cf.read('parent.nc', external='external.nc')[0]
   >>> print(g)
   Field: eastward_wind (ncvar%eastward_wind)
   ------------------------------------------
   Data            : eastward_wind(latitude(10), longitude(9)) m s-1
   Dimension coords: latitude(10) = [0.0, ..., 9.0] degrees
                   : longitude(9) = [0.0, ..., 8.0] degrees
   Cell measures   : measure:area(longitude(9), latitude(10)) = [[100000.5, ..., 100089.5]] m2
   >>> area = g.construct('measure:area')
   >>> area
   <CF CellMeasure: measure:area(9, 10) m2>
   >>> area.nc_get_external()
   False
   >>> area.nc_get_variable()
   'areacella'
   >>> area.properties()
   {'standard_name': 'cell_area', 'units': 'm2'}
   >>> area.data
   <CF Data(9, 10): [[100000.5, ..., 100089.5]] m2>
   
If this field construct were to be written to disk using `cf.write`
then by default the cell measure construct, with all of its metadata
and data, would be written to the named output file, along with all of
the other constructs. There would be no ``external_variables`` global
attribute.

To create a reference to an external variable in an output netCDF
file, set the status of the cell measure construct to "external" with
its `~CellMeasure.nc_set_external` method.

.. code-block:: python
   :caption: *Flag the cell measure as external and write the field
             construct to a new file.*

   >>> area.nc_set_external(True)
   >>> cf.write(g, 'new_parent.nc')

To create a reference to an external variable in the an output netCDF
file and simultaneously create an external file containing the
variable, set the status of the cell measure construct to "external"
and provide an external file name to the `cf.write` function:

.. code-block:: python
   :caption: *Write the field construct to a new file and the cell
             measure construct to an external file.*

   >>> cf.write(g, 'new_parent.nc', external='new_external.nc')

.. _External-variables-with-cfa:

External files with cfa
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

One or more external files may also be included with the :ref:`cfa
command line tool <File-inspection-with-cfa>`.

.. code-block:: console
   :caption: *Use cfa to describe the parent file without resolving
             the external variable reference.*
 	     
   $ cfa parent.nc 
   Field: eastward_wind (ncvar%eastward_wind)
   ------------------------------------------
   Data            : eastward_wind(latitude(10), longitude(9)) m s-1
   Dimension coords: latitude(10) = [0.0, ..., 9.0] degrees_north
                   : longitude(9) = [0.0, ..., 8.0] degrees_east
   Cell measures   : measure:area (external variable: ncvar%areacella)

.. code-block:: console
   :caption: *Providing an external file with the "-e" option allows
             the reference to be resolved.*
	     
   $ cfa -e external.nc parent.nc 
   Field: eastward_wind (ncvar%eastward_wind)
   ------------------------------------------
   Data            : eastward_wind(latitude(10), longitude(9)) m s-1
   Dimension coords: latitude(10) = [0.0, ..., 9.0] degrees_north
                   : longitude(9) = [0.0, ..., 8.0] degrees_east
   Cell measures   : measure:area(longitude(9), latitude(10)) = [[100000.5, ..., 100089.5]] m2

External variables will be written into new datasets if the *-v*
option is omitted.

----
  
.. _Aggregation:
   
**Aggregation**
---------------

Aggregation is the combination of field constructs to create a new
field construct that occupies a "larger" domain. Using the
:ref:`aggregation rules <Aggregation-rules>`, field constructs are
separated into aggregatable groups and each group is then aggregated
to a single field construct. Note that aggregation is possible over
multiple dimensions simultaneously.

Aggregation is, by default, applied to field constructs read from
datasets with the `cf.read` function, but may also be applied to field
constructs in memory with the `cf.aggregate` function.

.. code-block:: python
   :caption: *Demonstrate that the aggregation applied by 'cf.read' is
             equivalent to that carried by 'cf.aggregate'. This is
             done by splitting a field up into parts, writing those to
             disk, and then reading those parts and aggregating them.*

   >>> a = cf.read('air_temperature.nc')[0]
   >>> a
   <CF Field: air_temperature(time(2), latitude(73), longitude(96)) K>
   >>> a_parts = [a[0, : , 0:30], a[0, :, 30:96], a[1, :, 0:30], a[1, :, 30:96]]
   >>> a_parts
   [<CF Field: air_temperature(time(1), latitude(73), longitude(30)) K>,
    <CF Field: air_temperature(time(1), latitude(73), longitude(66)) K>,
    <CF Field: air_temperature(time(1), latitude(73), longitude(30)) K>,
    <CF Field: air_temperature(time(1), latitude(73), longitude(66)) K>]
   >>> for i, f in enumerate(a_parts):
   ...     cf.write(f, str(i)+'_air_temperature.nc')
   ...
   >>> x = cf.read('[0-3]_air_temperature.nc')
   >>> y = cf.read('[0-3]_air_temperature.nc', aggregate=False)
   >>> z = cf.aggregate(y)
   >>> x
   [<CF Field: air_temperature(time(2), latitude(73), longitude(96)) K>]
   >>> z
   [<CF Field: air_temperature(time(2), latitude(73), longitude(96)) K>]
   >>> x.equals(z)
   True

The `cf.aggregate` function has optional parameters to

* Display information about the aggregation process,
* Relax the conditions to the need for standard names and units
  properties,
* Specify whether or not to allow field constructs with overlapping or
  non-contiguous cells to be aggregated,
* Define the treatment of properties with different values across the
  set of aggregated field constructs,
* Create a new aggregated domain axes with coordinate values taken
  from a named field construct property,
* Restrict aggregation to particular domain axes, and
* Set the tolerance for numerical comparisons.  

These parameters are also available to the `cf.read` function via its
*aggregate* parameter.
   
Note that when reading :ref:`PP and UM fields files
<PP-and-UM-fields-files>` with `cf.read`, the *relaxed_units* option
is `True` by default, because units are not always available to field
constructs derived from :ref:`PP-and-UM-fields-files`.

Field constructs that are logically similar but arranged differently
are also aggregatable.

.. code-block:: python
   :caption: *Show that the aggregation is unchanged when one of the
             field constructs has a different axis order and different
             units.*

   >>> x = cf.aggregate(a_parts)
   >>> x
   [<CF Field: air_temperature(time(2), latitude(73), longitude(96)) K>]
   >>> a_parts[1].transpose(inplace=True)
   >>> a_parts[1].units = 'degreesC'
   >>> a_parts
   [<CF Field: air_temperature(time(1), latitude(73), longitude(30)) K>,
    <CF Field: air_temperature(longitude(66), latitude(73), time(1)) degreesC>,
    <CF Field: air_temperature(time(1), latitude(73), longitude(30)) K>,
    <CF Field: air_temperature(time(1), latitude(73), longitude(66)) K>]
   >>> z = cf.aggregate(a_parts)
   >>> z   
   [<CF Field: air_temperature(time(2), latitude(73), longitude(96)) K>]
   >>> x.equals(z)
   True

----

.. _Compression:
   
**Compression**
---------------

The CF conventions have support for saving space by identifying and
removing unwanted missing data.  Such compression techniques store the
data more efficiently and result in no precision loss. The CF data
model, however, views compressed arrays in their uncompressed form.

Therefore, the field construct contains domain axis constructs for the
compressed dimensions and presents a view of compressed data in its
uncompressed form, even though the "underlying array" (i.e. the actual
array on disk or in memory that is contained in a `cf.Data` instance) is
compressed. This means that the cf package includes algorithms for
uncompressing each type of compressed array.

.. TODO2 CF-1.8 Note that geometries use ragged arrays

There are two basic types of compression supported by the CF
conventions: ragged arrays (as used by :ref:`discrete sampling
geometries <Discrete-sampling-geometries>`) and :ref:`compression by
gathering <Gathering>`, each of which has particular implementation
details, but the following access patterns and behaviours apply to
both:

* Whether or not the data are compressed is tested with the
  `~Data.get_compression_type` method of the `cf.Data` instance.

..

* The compressed underlying array may be retrieved as a numpy array
  with the `~Data.compressed_array` attribute of the `cf.Data` instance.

..

* Accessing the data via the `~Field.array` attribute returns a numpy
  array that is uncompressed. The underlying array will also be
  uncompressed.

..

* A subspace of a field construct is created with indices of the
  uncompressed form of the data. The new subspace will no longer be
  compressed, i.e. its underlying arrays will be uncompressed, but the
  original data will remain compressed. It follows that all of the
  data in a field construct may be uncompressed by indexing the field
  construct with (indices equivalent to) `Ellipsis`.
  
..

* If data elements are modified by :ref:`assigning
  <Assignment-by-index>` to indices of the uncompressed form of the
  data, then the compressed underlying array is replaced by its
  uncompressed form.

..

* An uncompressed field construct can be compressed, prior to being
  written to a dataset, with its `~Field.compress` method, which also
  compresses the metadata constructs as required.

..

* An compressed field construct can be uncompressed with its
  `~Field.uncompress` method, which also uncompresses the metadata
  constructs as required.

..

* If an underlying array is compressed at the time of writing to disk
  with the `cf.write` function, then it is written to the file as a
  compressed array, along with the supplementary netCDF variables and
  attributes that are required for the encoding. This means that if a
  dataset using compression is read from disk then it will be written
  back to disk with the same compression, unless data elements have
  been modified by assignment.

Examples of all of the above may be found in the sections on
:ref:`discrete sampling geometries <Discrete-sampling-geometries>` and
:ref:`gathering <Gathering>`.

.. _Discrete-sampling-geometries:
   
Discrete sampling geometries
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

`Discrete sampling geometry (DSG)`_ features may be compressed by
combining them using one of three ragged array representations:
`contiguous`_, `indexed`_ or `indexed contiguous`_.

The count variable that is required to uncompress a contiguous, or
indexed contiguous, ragged array is stored in a `cf.Count` instance
and is accessed with the `~Data.get_count` method of the `cf.Data`
instance.

The index variable that is required to uncompress an indexed, or
indexed contiguous, ragged array is stored in an `cf.Index` instance
and is accessed with the `~Data.get_index` method of the `cf.Data`
instance.

The contiguous case is is illustrated with the file ``contiguous.nc``
(found in the :ref:`sample datasets <Sample-datasets>`):

.. code-block:: console
   :caption: *Inspect the compressed dataset with the ncdump command
             line tool.*
   
   $ ncdump -h contiguous.nc
   dimensions:
   	station = 4 ;
   	obs = 24 ;
   	strlen8 = 8 ;
   variables:
   	int row_size(station) ;
   		row_size:long_name = "number of observations for this station" ;
   		row_size:sample_dimension = "obs" ;
   	double time(obs) ;
   		time:units = "days since 1970-01-01 00:00:00" ;
   		time:standard_name = "time" ;
   	double lat(station) ;
   		lat:units = "degrees_north" ;
   		lat:standard_name = "latitude" ;
   	double lon(station) ;
   		lon:units = "degrees_east" ;
   		lon:standard_name = "longitude" ;
   	double alt(station) ;
   		alt:units = "m" ;
   		alt:positive = "up" ;
   		alt:standard_name = "height" ;
   		alt:axis = "Z" ;
   	char station_name(station, strlen8) ;
   		station_name:long_name = "station name" ;
   		station_name:cf_role = "timeseries_id" ;
   	double humidity(obs) ;
   		humidity:standard_name = "specific_humidity" ;
   		humidity:coordinates = "time lat lon alt station_name" ;
   		humidity:_FillValue = -999.9 ;
   
   // global attributes:
   		:Conventions = "CF-1.7" ;
   		:featureType = "timeSeries" ;
   }

Reading and inspecting this file shows the data presented in
two-dimensional uncompressed form, whilst the underlying array is
still in the one-dimension ragged representation described in the
file:

.. code-block:: python
   :caption: *Read a field construct from a dataset that has been
             compressed with contiguous ragged arrays, and inspect its
             data in uncompressed form.*
   
   >>> h = cf.read('contiguous.nc')[0]
   >>> print(h)
   Field: specific_humidity (ncvar%humidity)
   -----------------------------------------
   Data            : specific_humidity(ncdim%station(4), ncdim%timeseries(9))
   Dimension coords: 
   Auxiliary coords: time(ncdim%station(4), ncdim%timeseries(9)) = [[1969-12-29 00:00:00, ..., 1970-01-07 00:00:00]]
                   : latitude(ncdim%station(4)) = [-9.0, ..., 78.0] degrees_north
                   : longitude(ncdim%station(4)) = [-23.0, ..., 178.0] degrees_east
                   : height(ncdim%station(4)) = [0.5, ..., 345.0] m
                   : cf_role:timeseries_id(ncdim%station(4)) = [station1, ..., station4]
   >>> print(h.array)
   [[0.12 0.05 0.18   --   --   --   --   --   --]
    [0.05 0.11 0.2  0.15 0.08 0.04 0.06   --   --]
    [0.15 0.19 0.15 0.17 0.07   --   --   --   --]
    [0.11 0.03 0.14 0.16 0.02 0.09 0.1  0.04 0.11]]

.. code-block:: python
   :caption: *Inspect the underlying compressed array and the count
             variable that defines how to uncompress the data.*
	     
   >>> h.data.get_compression_type()
   'ragged contiguous'
   >>> print(h.data.compressed_array)
   [0.12 0.05 0.18 0.05 0.11 0.2 0.15 0.08 0.04 0.06 0.15 0.19 0.15 0.17 0.07
    0.11 0.03 0.14 0.16 0.02 0.09 0.1 0.04 0.11]
   >>> count_variable = h.data.get_count()
   >>> count_variable
   <CF Count: long_name=number of observations for this station(4) >
   >>> print(count_variable.array)
   [3 7 5 9]

The timeseries for the second station is easily selected by indexing
the "station" axis of the field construct:

.. code-block:: python
   :caption: *Get the data for the second station.*
	  
   >>> station2 = h[1]
   >>> station2
   <CF Field: specific_humidity(cf_role=timeseries_id(1), ncdim%timeseries(9))>
   >>> print(station2.array)
   [[0.05 0.11 0.2 0.15 0.08 0.04 0.06 -- --]]

The underlying array of original data remains in compressed form until
data array elements are modified:
   
.. code-block:: python
   :caption: *Change an element of the data and show that the
             underlying array is no longer compressed.*

   >>> h.data.get_compression_type()
   'ragged contiguous'
   >>> h.data[1, 2] = -9
   >>> print(h.array)
   [[0.12 0.05 0.18   --   --   --   --   --   --]
    [0.05 0.11 -9.0 0.15 0.08 0.04 0.06   --   --]
    [0.15 0.19 0.15 0.17 0.07   --   --   --   --]
    [0.11 0.03 0.14 0.16 0.02 0.09 0.1  0.04 0.11]]
   >>> h.data.get_compression_type()
   ''

Perhaps the easiest way to create a compressed field construct is to
create the equivalent uncompressed field construct and then compress
it with its `~Field.compress` method, which also compresses the
metadata constructs as required.
   
.. Code Block 4

.. code-block:: python
   :caption: *Create a field construct and then compress it.*

   import numpy
   import cf
   
   # Define the array values
   data = cf.Data([[280.0,   -99,   -99,   -99],
                   [281.0, 279.0, 278.0, 279.5]])
   data.where(cf.eq(-99), cf.masked, inplace=True)
   	     
   # Create the field construct
   T = cf.Field()
   T.set_properties({'standard_name': 'air_temperature',
                     'units': 'K',
                     'featureType': 'timeSeries'})
   
   # Create the domain axis constructs
   X = T.set_construct(cf.DomainAxis(4))
   Y = T.set_construct(cf.DomainAxis(2))
   
   # Set the data for the field
   T.set_data(data)
 
   # Compress the data 
   T.compress('contiguous',
          count_properties={'long_name': 'number of obs for this timeseries'},
          inplace=True)
				
The new compressed field construct can now be inspected and written to
a netCDF file:

.. code-block:: python
   :caption: *Inspect the new field construct and write it to disk.*
   
   >>> T
   <CF Field: air_temperature(key%domainaxis1(2), key%domainaxis0(4)) K>
   >>> print(T.array)
   [[280.0    --    --    --]
    [281.0 279.0 278.0 279.5]]
   >>> T.data.get_compression_type()
   'ragged contiguous'
   >>> print(T.data.compressed_array)
   [280.  281.  279.  278.  279.5]
   >>> count_variable = T.data.get_count()
   >>> count_variable
   <CF Count: long_name=number of obs for this timeseries(2) >
   >>> print(count_variable.array)
   [1 4]
   >>> cf.write(T, 'T_contiguous.nc')

The content of the new file is:
  
.. code-block:: console
   :caption: *Inspect the new compressed dataset with the ncdump
             command line tool.*   

   $ ncdump T_contiguous.nc
   netcdf T_contiguous {
   dimensions:
   	dim = 2 ;
   	element = 5 ;
   variables:
   	int64 count(dim) ;
   		count:long_name = "number of obs for this timeseries" ;
   		count:sample_dimension = "element" ;
   	float air_temperature(element) ;
   		air_temperature:units = "K" ;
   		air_temperature:standard_name = "air_temperature" ;
   
   // global attributes:
		:Conventions = "CF-1.7" ;
		:featureType = "timeSeries" ;
   data:
   
    count = 1, 4 ;
   
    air_temperature = 280, 281, 279, 278, 279.5 ;
   }
	
Exactly the same field construct may be also created explicitly with
underlying compressed data. A construct with an underlying ragged
array is created by initialising a `cf.Data` instance with a ragged
array that is stored in one of three special array objects:
`RaggedContiguousArray`, `RaggedIndexedArray` or
`RaggedIndexedContiguousArray`.

.. Code Block 5

.. code-block:: python
   :caption: *Create a field construct explicitly with compressed
             data.*

   import numpy
   import cf
   
   # Define the ragged array values
   ragged_array = cf.Data([280, 281, 279, 278, 279.5])

   # Define the count array values
   count_array = [1, 4]

   # Create the count variable
   count_variable = cf.Count(data=cf.Data(count_array))
   count_variable.set_property('long_name',
                               'number of obs for this timeseries')

   # Create the contiguous ragged array object, specifying the
   # uncompressed shape
   array = cf.RaggedContiguousArray(
                    compressed_array=ragged_array,
                    shape=(2, 4), size=8, ndim=2,
                    count_variable=count_variable)

   # Create the field construct
   T.set_properties({'standard_name': 'air_temperature',
                     'units': 'K',
                     'featureType': 'timeSeries'})
   
   # Create the domain axis constructs for the uncompressed array
   X = T.set_construct(cf.DomainAxis(4))
   Y = T.set_construct(cf.DomainAxis(2))
   
   # Set the data for the field
   T.set_data(cf.Data(array))
	
.. _Gathering:

Gathering
^^^^^^^^^

`Compression by gathering`_ combines axes of a multidimensional array
into a new, discrete axis whilst omitting the missing values and thus
reducing the number of values that need to be stored.

The list variable that is required to uncompress a gathered array is
stored in a `cf.List` object and is retrieved with the `~Data.get_list`
method of the `cf.Data` instance.

This is illustrated with the file ``gathered.nc`` (found in the
:ref:`sample datasets <Sample-datasets>`):

.. code-block:: console
   :caption: *Inspect the compressed dataset with the ncdump command
             line tool.*
      
   $ ncdump -h gathered.nc
   netcdf gathered {
   dimensions:
   	time = 2 ;
   	lat = 4 ;
   	lon = 5 ;
   	landpoint = 7 ;
   variables:
   	double time(time) ;
   		time:standard_name = "time" ;
   		time:units = "days since 2000-1-1" ;
   	double lat(lat) ;
   		lat:standard_name = "latitude" ;
   		lat:units = "degrees_north" ;
   	double lon(lon) ;
   		lon:standard_name = "longitude" ;
   		lon:units = "degrees_east" ;
   	int landpoint(landpoint) ;
   		landpoint:compress = "lat lon" ;
   	double pr(time, landpoint) ;
   		pr:standard_name = "precipitation_flux" ;
   		pr:units = "kg m2 s-1" ;
   
   // global attributes:
   		:Conventions = "CF-1.7" ;
   }

Reading and inspecting this file shows the data presented in
three-dimensional uncompressed form, whilst the underlying array is
still in the two-dimensional gathered representation described in the
file:

.. code-block:: python
   :caption: *Read a field construct from a dataset that has been
             compressed by gathering, and inspect its data in
             uncompressed form.*

   >>> p = cf.read('gathered.nc')[0]
   >>> print(p)
   Field: precipitation_flux (ncvar%pr)
   ------------------------------------
   Data            : precipitation_flux(time(2), latitude(4), longitude(5)) kg m2 s-1
   Dimension coords: time(2) = [2000-02-01 00:00:00, 2000-03-01 00:00:00]
                   : latitude(4) = [-90.0, ..., -75.0] degrees_north
                   : longitude(5) = [0.0, ..., 40.0] degrees_east
   >>> print(p.array)
   [[[--       0.000122 0.0008   --       --      ]
     [0.000177 --       0.000175 0.00058  --      ]
     [--       --       --       --       --      ]
     [--       0.000206 --       0.0007   --      ]]
					  	 
    [[--       0.000202 0.000174 --       --      ]
     [0.00084  --       0.000201 0.0057   --      ]
     [--       --       --       --       --      ]
     [--       0.000223 --       0.000102 --      ]]]

.. code-block:: python
   :caption: *Inspect the underlying compressed array and the list
             variable that defines how to uncompress the data.*
	     
   >>> p.data.get_compression_type()
   'gathered'
   >>> print(p.data.compressed_array)
   [[0.000122 0.0008   0.000177 0.000175 0.00058 0.000206 0.0007  ]
    [0.000202 0.000174 0.00084  0.000201 0.0057  0.000223 0.000102]]
   >>> list_variable = p.data.get_list()
   >>> list_variable
   <CF List: ncvar%landpoint(7) >
   >>> print(list_variable.array)
   [ 1  2  5  7  8 16 18]


Subspaces based on the uncompressed axes of the field construct are
easily created:

.. code-block:: python
   :caption: *Get subspaces based on indices of the uncompressed
             data.*
	  
   >>> p[0]
   <CF Field: precipitation_flux(time(1), latitude(4), longitude(5)) kg m2 s-1>
   >>> p[1, :, 3:5]
   <CF Field: precipitation_flux(time(1), latitude(4), longitude(2)) kg m2 s-1>

The underlying array of original data remains in compressed form until
data array elements are modified:
   
.. code-block:: python
   :caption: *Change an element of the data and show that the
             underlying array is no longer compressed.*

   >>> p.data.get_compression_type()
   'gathered'
   >>> p.data[1] = -9
   >>> p.data.get_compression_type()
   ''
   
A construct with an underlying gathered array is created by
initializing a `cf.Data` instance with a gathered array that is stored
in the special `cf.GatheredArray` array object. The following code
creates a simple field construct with an underlying gathered array:

.. Code Block 6

.. code-block:: python
   :caption: *Create a field construct with compressed data.*

   import numpy	  
   import cf

   # Define the gathered values
   gathered_array = cf.Data([[2, 1, 3], [4, 0, 5]])

   # Define the list array values
   list_array = [1, 4, 5]

   # Create the list variable
   list_variable = cf.List(data=cf.Data(list_array))

   # Create the gathered array object, specifying the uncompressed
   # shape
   array = cf.GatheredArray(
                    compressed_array=gathered_array,
		    compressed_dimension=1,
                    shape=(2, 3, 2), size=12, ndim=3,
                    list_variable=list_variable)

   # Create the field construct with the domain axes and the gathered
   # array
   P = cf.Field(properties={'standard_name': 'precipitation_flux',
                              'units': 'kg m-2 s-1'})

   # Create the domain axis constructs for the uncompressed array
   T = P.set_construct(cf.DomainAxis(2))
   Y = P.set_construct(cf.DomainAxis(3))
   X = P.set_construct(cf.DomainAxis(2))

   # Set the data for the field
   P.set_data(cf.Data(array), axes=[T, Y, X])

Note that, because compression by gathering acts on a subset of the
array dimensions, it is necessary to state the position of the
compressed dimension in the compressed array (with the
``compressed_dimension`` parameter of the `cf.GatheredArray`
initialisation).

The new field construct can now be inspected and written a netCDF file:

.. code-block:: python
   :caption: *Inspect the new field construct and write it to disk.*
   
   >>> P
   <CF Field: precipitation_flux(key%domainaxis0(2), key%domainaxis1(3), key%domainaxis2(2)) kg m-2 s-1>
   >>> print(P.data.array)
   [[[ -- 2.0]
     [ --  --]
     [1.0 3.0]]

    [[ -- 4.0]
     [ --  --]
     [0.0 5.0]]]
   >>> P.data.get_compression_type()
   'gathered'
   >>> print(P.data.compressed_array)
   [[2. 1. 3.]
    [4. 0. 5.]]
   >>> list_variable = P.data.get_list()
   >>> list_variable 
   <CF List: (3) >
   >>> print(list_variable.array)
   [1 4 5]
   >>> cf.write(P, 'P_gathered.nc')

The content of the new file is:
   
.. code-block:: console
   :caption: *Inspect new the compressed dataset with the ncdump
             command line tool.*
   
   $ ncdump P_gathered.nc
   netcdf P_gathered {
   dimensions:
   	dim = 2 ;
   	dim_1 = 3 ;
   	dim_2 = 2 ;
   	list = 3 ;
   variables:
   	int64 list(list) ;
   		list:compress = "dim_1 dim_2" ;
   	float precipitation_flux(dim, list) ;
   		precipitation_flux:units = "kg m-2 s-1" ;
   		precipitation_flux:standard_name = "precipitation_flux" ;
   
   // global attributes:
   		:Conventions = "CF-1.7" ;
   data:
   
    list = 1, 4, 5 ;
   
    precipitation_flux =
     2, 1, 3,
     4, 0, 5 ;
   }

----

.. _PP-and-UM-fields-files:

**PP and UM fields files**
--------------------------

The `cf.read` function can read PP files and UM fields files (as
output by some versions of the `Unified Model
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Unified_Model>`_, for example), mapping
their contents into field constructs. 32-bit and 64-bit PP and UM
fields files of any endian-ness can be read. In nearly all cases the
file format is auto-detectable from the first 64 bits in the file, but
for the few occasions when this is not possible [#um]_, the *um*
keyword of `cf.read` allows the format to be specified. The the UM
version (if not inferable from the PP or lookup header information)
and the height of the upper bound of the top model level may also be
set with the *um* keyword.

Note that 2-d "slices" within a single file are always combined, where
possible, into field constructs with 3-d, 4-d or 5-d data. This is
done prior to the :ref:`field construct aggregation <Aggregation>`
carried out by the `cf.read` function.

.. code-block:: python
   :caption: *Read a PP file into field constructs.*
   
   >>> pp = cf.read('umfile.pp')
   >>> pp
   [<CF Field: surface_air_pressure(time(3), latitude(73), longitude(96)) Pa>]
   >>> print(pp[0])
   Field: surface_air_pressure (ncvar%UM_m01s00i001_vn405)
   -------------------------------------------------------
   Data            : surface_air_pressure(time(3), latitude(73), longitude(96)) Pa
   Cell methods    : time(3): mean
   Dimension coords: time(3) = [2160-06-01 00:00:00, 2161-06-01 00:00:00, 2162-06-01 00:00:00] 360_day
                   : latitude(73) = [90.0, ..., -90.0] degrees_north
                   : longitude(96) = [0.0, ..., 356.25] degrees_east

		   
Converting PP and UM fields files to netCDF files
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

PP and UM fields files may read with `cf.read` and subsequently
written to disk as netCDF files with `cf.write`.

.. code-block:: python
   :caption: *Write the field constructs from a PP file to a netCDF
             dataset.*
   
   >>> cf.write(pp, 'umfile1.nc')

Alternatively, the ``cfa`` command line tool may be used with PP and UM
fields files in exactly the same way as netCDF files. This provides a
view of PP and UM fields files as CF field constructs, and also easily
converts PP and UM fields files to netCDF datasets on disk.

.. code-block:: console
   :caption: *Use the 'cfa' shell command to view a PP file and
             convert it to a netCDF dataset.*
   
   $ cfa umfile.pp
   CF Field: surface_air_pressure(time(3), latitude(73), longitude(96)) Pa
   $ cfa -o umfile2.nc umfile.pp
   $ cfa umfile2.nc
   CF Field: surface_air_pressure(time(3), latitude(73), longitude(96)) Pa
   

Mapping of PP header items to field constructs
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

In addition to the creation of any CF constructs and properties that
are implied by the `PP and lookup header
<http://artefacts.ceda.ac.uk/badc_datadocs/um/umdp_F3-UMDPF3.pdf>`_,
certain lookup header items are stored, for convenience, as field
construct properties:

===========  ===================  ========================
Header item  Description          Field construct property
===========  ===================  ========================
LBEXP        Experiment identity  runid
LBTIM        Time indicator       lbtim
LBPROC       Processing code      lbproc
LBUSER(4)    STASH code           stash_code
LBUSER(7)    Internal submodel    submodel
===========  ===================  ========================

All such field construct properties are stored as strings. The value
of LBEXP is an integer that is decoded to a string identity before
being stored as a field construct property.

STASH code to standard name mappings
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The standard name and units properties of a field construct are
inferred from the STASH code of the PP and lookup headers. The text
database that maps header items to standard names and units is stored
in the file ``etc/STASH_to_CF.txt`` within the cf library
installation. The database is available as a dictionary, keyed by
submodel and stash code tuples. The database contains many STASH codes
without standard names nor units, and will not contain user-defined
STASH codes. However, modifying existing entries, or adding new ones,
is straight forward with the `cf.load_stash2standard_name` function.

.. code-block:: python
   :caption: *Inspect the STASH to standard name database, and modify
             it.*
   
   >>> type(cf.read_write.um.umread.stash2standard_name)                       
   <class 'dict'>
   >>> cf.read_write.um.umread.stash2standard_name[(1, 4)]                    
   (['THETA AFTER TIMESTEP                ',
     'K',
     None,
     None,
     'air_potential_temperature',
     {},
     ''],)
   >>> cf.read_write.um.umread.stash2standard_name[(1, 2)]
   (['U COMPNT OF WIND AFTER TIMESTEP     ',
     'm s-1',
     None,
     None,
     'eastward_wind',
     {},
     'true_latitude_longitude'],
    ['U COMPNT OF WIND AFTER TIMESTEP     ',
     'm s-1',
     None,
     None,
     'x_wind',
     {},
     'rotated_latitude_longitude'])
   >>> cf.read_write.um.umread.stash2standard_name[(1, 7)]                    
   (['UNFILTERED OROGRAPHY                ',
     None,
     708.0,
     None,
     '',
     {},
    ''],)
   >>> (1, 999) in cf.read_write.um.umread.stash2standard_name
   False
   >>> with open('new_STASH.txt', 'w') as new:  
   ...     new.write('1!999!My STASH code!1!!!ultraviolet_index!!') 
   ... 
   >>> _ = cf.load_stash2standard_name('new_STASH.txt', merge=True)
   >>> cf.read_write.um.umread.stash2standard_name[(1, 999)]
   (['My STASH code',
     '1',
     None,
     None,
     'ultraviolet_index',
     {},
     ''],)

----

.. include:: field_analysis.rst


.. _Controlling-output-messages:

**Controlling output messages**
-------------------------------

cf will produce messages upon the execution of operations, to
provide feedback about:

* the progress of, and under-the-hood steps involved in, the
  operations it is performing;
* the events that emerge during these operations;
* the nature of the dataset being operated on, including CF compliance
  issues that may be encountered during the operation.

This feedback may be purely informational, or may convey warning(s)
about dataset issues or the potential for future error(s).

It is possible to configure the extent to which messages are output at
runtime, i.e. the verbosity of cf, so that less serious and/or more
detailed messages can be filtered out.

There are two means to do this, which are covered in more detail in
the sub-sections below. Namely, you may configure the extent of
messaging:

* **globally** i.e. for all cf operations, by setting the
  `cf.log_level` which controls the project-wide logging;
* **for a specific function only** (for many functions) by setting
  that function's *verbose* keyword argument (which overrides the
  global setting for the duration of the function call).

Both possibilities use a consistent level-based cut-off system, as
detailed below.

.. _Logging:

Logging
^^^^^^^

All messages from cf, excluding exceptions which are always raised
in error cases, are incorporated into a logging system which assigns
to each a level based on the relative seriousness and/or
verbosity. From highest to lowest on this scale, these levels are:

* ``'WARNING'``: conveys a warning;
* ``'INFO'``: provides information concisely, in a few lines or so;
* ``'DETAIL'``: provides information in a more detailed manner than
  ``'INFO'``;
* ``'DEBUG'``: produces highly-verbose information intended mainly for
  the purposes of debugging and cf library development.

The function `cf.log_level` sets the minimum of these levels for
which messages are displayed. Any message marked as being of any lower
level will be filtered out. Note it sets the verbosity *globally*, for
*all* cf library operations (unless these are overridden for
individual functions, as covered below).

As well as the named log levels above, `cf.log_level` accepts a
further identifier, ``'DISABLE'``. Each of these potential settings
has a numerical value that is treated interchangeably and may instead
be set (as this may be easier to recall and write, if less
explicit). The resulting behaviour in each case is as follows:

=======================  ============  =========================================
Log level                Integer code  Result when set as the log severity level
=======================  ============  =========================================
``'DISABLE'``            ``0``         *Disable all* logging messages. Note this
                                       does not include exception messages
                                       raised by errors.

``'WARNING'`` (default)  ``1``         *Only show* logging messages that are
                                       *warnings* (those labelled as
                                       ``'WARNING'``).

``'INFO'``               ``2``         *Only show* logging messages that are
                                       *warnings or concise informational
                                       messages* (marked as ``'WARNING'`` or
                                       ``'INFO'`` respectively).

``'DETAIL'``             ``3``         *Enable all* logging messages *except
                                       for debugging messages*. In other words,
                                       show logging messages labelled
                                       ``'WARNING'``, ``'INFO'`` and
                                       ``'DETAIL'``, but not ``'DEBUG'``.

``'DEBUG'``              ``-1``        *Enable all* logging messages,
                                       *including debugging messages*
                                       (labelled as ``'DEBUG'``).
=======================  ============  =========================================

Note ``'DEBUG'`` is intended as a special case for debugging, which
should not be required in general usage of cf, hence its equivalence
to ``-1`` rather than ``4`` which would follow the increasing integer
code pattern.  ``-1`` reflects that it is the final value in the
sequence, as with Python indexing.

The default value for `cf.log_level` is ``'WARNING'`` (``1``).
However, whilst completing this tutorial, it may be instructive to set
the log level` to a higher verbosity level such as ``'INFO'`` to gain
insight into the internal workings of cf calls.


.. _Function-verbosity:

Function verbosity
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Functions and methods that involve a particularly high number of steps
or especially complex processing, for example the `cf.read` and
`cf.write` functions, accept a keyword argument *verbose*. This be
set to change the minimum log level at which messages are displayed
for the function/method call only, without being influenced by, or
influencing, the global `cf.log_level` value.

A *verbose* value effectively overrides the value of `cf.log_level`
for the function/method along with any functions/methods it calls in
turn, until the origin function/method completes.

The *verbose* argument accepts the same levels as `cf.log_level`
(including ``0`` for ``'DISABLE'``), as described in :ref:`the logging
section <logging>`, namely either an integer or a corresponding string
for example ``verbose=2`` or equivalently ``verbose='INFO'``
(or ``verbose='info'`` since case is ignored).

By default, *verbose* is set to `None`, in which case the value of the
`cf.log_level` setting is used to determine which messages,
if any, are filtered out.


.. rubric:: Footnotes


.. [#dap] Requires the netCDF4 python package to have been built with
          OPeNDAP support enabled. See
          http://unidata.github.io/netcdf4-python for details.

.. [#um] For example, if the LBYR, LBMON, LBDAY and LBHR entries are
         all zero for the first header in a 32-bit PP file, the file
         format can not reliably be detected automatically.


.. External links

.. _numpy broadcasting rules: https://docs.scipy.org/doc/numpy/user/basics.broadcasting.html

.. External links to the CF conventions (will need updating with new versions of CF)
   
.. _External variables:               http://cfconventions.org/Data/cf-conventions/cf-conventions-1.8/cf-conventions.html#external-variables
.. _Discrete sampling geometry (DSG): http://cfconventions.org/Data/cf-conventions/cf-conventions-1.8/cf-conventions.html#discrete-sampling-geometries
.. _incomplete multidimensional form: http://cfconventions.org/Data/cf-conventions/cf-conventions-1.8/cf-conventions.html#_incomplete_multidimensional_array_representation
.. _Compression by gathering:         http://cfconventions.org/Data/cf-conventions/cf-conventions-1.8/cf-conventions.html#compression-by-gathering
.. _contiguous:                       http://cfconventions.org/Data/cf-conventions/cf-conventions-1.8/cf-conventions.html#_contiguous_ragged_array_representation
.. _indexed:                          http://cfconventions.org/Data/cf-conventions/cf-conventions-1.8/cf-conventions.html#_indexed_ragged_array_representation
.. _indexed contiguous:               http://cfconventions.org/Data/cf-conventions/cf-conventions-1.8/cf-conventions.html#_ragged_array_representation_of_time_series_profiles
.. _geometries:                       http://cfconventions.org/Data/cf-conventions/cf-conventions-1.8/cf-conventions.html#geometries
.. _Hierarchical groups:              http://cfconventions.org/Data/cf-conventions/cf-conventions-1.8/cf-conventions.html#groups

